Subject: Issue 316                                      J3/01-250
From: Kurt W. Hirchert                  (Meeting 157) 07 Jun 2001 

========
Overview
========

Issue 316 concerns editorial infelicities in one sentence of
14.1.2.4.4.  While attempting to repair those editorial problems,
editorial problems were found in the rest of the paragraph.
While repairing those editorial problems, technical deficiencies
were found in the paragraph.  While repairing those deficiencies,
technical/editorial problems were found in the preceding
paragraph.  While addressing those, redundant (and possibly
incomplete or incorrect) material was found in 9.5.4.4.3.  I hope
we have reached the caboose on this train.  The edits below
attempt to address the whole chain of problems originating with
issue 316.

=====
Edits
=====

[194:18-25] Delete.  {[191:43-192:1] says to look for this
information in 14.1.2.4.4, so don't state it here.}

[194:26] Change "The" to "When a user-defined derived-type
input/output procedure is invoked, the".  {Replace the
introductory function of the text deleted above.}

[347:20-21] Change "method (formatted, list-directed, namelist or
unformatted" to "form (formatted or unformatted)".  {This concept
of method is not defined anywhere, and there is no separate
uddtio procedure for namelist or list-directed input/output.}

[347:24-37] Replace the J3 note and the paragraph it references
with the following:

"When an effective item (9.5.2) that is of derived-type is
encountered during a data transfer, user-defined derived-type
input/output occurs if both of the following conditions are true:
  (1) The circumstances of the input/output are such that user-
      defined derived-type input/output is permitted; that is,
      either
      (a) the transfer was initiated by a list-directed, namelist,
          or unformatted input/output statement, or
      (b) a format specification is supplied for the input/output
          statement, and the edit descriptor corresponding to the
          effective item is a DT edit descriptor.
  (2) A suitable user-defined derived-type input/output
      procedure is available; that is, either
      (a) the declared type of the effective item has a suitable
          type-bound generic binding, or
      (b) a suitable generic interface is accessible.

If (2)(a) is true, the procedure referenced is determined as for
explicit type-bound procedure references; that is, the binding
with the appropriate specific interface is located in the declared
type of the effective item, and the corresponding binding in the
dynamic type of the effective item is selected.  This binding
shall not be deferred.

If (2)(a) is false and (2)(b) is true, the reference is to the
procedure identified by the appropriate specific interface in the
interface block."

                              - end -
