Date:    27-feb-2002                                    J2/02-148R1
To:      J3
From:    Subgroup C
Subject: Misc issues in Sections 8-12

Edits to 02-007.


1) The sentence in [184:14-15] describes a process for applying rules
without mentioning that the rules can be found in the following
paragraphs.

Edit: [184:14] The rules -> The following rules


2) Dropped

3) Dropped

4) In [221:7-11] the letter 'r' is suddenly used without an explanation
of what it represents or how it is defined.

Edit: [221:7] datum. -> datum, and r be the rounding value defined in
the table below.


5) In three places we provide lists of characters that are unacceptable
as part of input character sequences because they could be separators.
These lists are not updated to include the new option of the ; as a
input value separator.

Edits: [226:26-27] slashes, blanks, or commas -> value separators

[227:5] the value separators blank, comma, or slash -> value separators

[231:35-36] slashes, blanks, equals, or commas -> equals or value
separators


6) The first paragraph on page 237 lumps PROTECTED in with PUBLIC and
PRIVATE as methods for controlling accessibility. This is not correct.
PROTECTED does not affect accessibility.  Also, the text "PUBLIC
statement" is missing in line 3.

Edits: [237:3] Replace 

"PRIVATE statement, the (5.2.1), the PROTECTED statement (5.2.11)," 

with

"PRIVATE statement, the PUBLIC statement (5.2.1),"

[237:5] Add "The PROTECTED statement (5.2.11) and the PROTECTED
attribute (5.1.2.12) are used to control the definability of module
entities outside the module."


7) In [238:29,32] the phrase "public accessibility" needs to be made
more explicit to avoid confusion.

Edits: [238:29] and public accessibility -> that has the PUBLIC attribute

[238:32] with public accessibility -> that has the PUBLIC attribute


8) Dropped

9) Dropped

10) The sentence beginning in [255:12] discusses that two dummy arguments can
be associated without noting that they must not be in the same program
unit. Some clarification would help.

Edit: [255:12] after "associated with" add " an actual argument that is"


11) Dropped

12) The final two sentences in Note 12.48 on 273 suggest that "it is
anticipated that most library procedures...".  Referencing global data
is not dangerous if it will not be redefined.  The new PROTECTED
attribute provides a mechanism to control redefinition of global data.
These sentences are less relevant now.

Edit: Delete last two sentences in Note 12.48, page 273.

------

Comment without suggested edit:  Note 12.40 is new in this draft. It
represents what is possibly the worst algorithm for computing a
cumulative sum. I know that teaching efficient programming technique is
not the point of the Notes, but manifestly bad programming habits should
be avoided.  Should we be looking for a better example of a recursive
function?
