
                                                               J3/03-276

To:         J3
From:       Richard Bleikamp
Date:       November 11, 2003
Subject:    Reply to H2 Database Question about Fortran FCD
Ref:        J3/03-268


Following is the Liaison Report with H2 Database.  This report is based on
an e-mail conversation with Fred Zemke, the H2 Liaison to J3.

SQL:2003 is in FDIS ballot.  Most of the significant new functionality in
SQL:2003 is in a new part, SQL/XML, dealing with integrating SQL and XML.
This part is continuing to receive a lot of work, and H2 hopes to publish
the next edition of just this part in 2005.

The H2 connection with Fortran is solely concerned with data types, what H2
calls "bindings", which are associations between database types and
programming language types.  The SQL standard has done almost no work on
bindings in many years, meaning that the SQL bindings are pretty much the
same as they were in SQL-92.  Assuming that Fortran has not done any
incompatible changes to types since then (such as deleting a type) H2 is
probably pretty safe.  SQL's own type system grew a lot with the
introduction of Object/Relational in SQL:1999, but H2 did not make any
effort to update the bindings to take advantage of object technology in
host languages.  H2 could still do this, but there may not be the time or
inclination.

Unfortunately, the SQL Standards Web site, http://www.sqlstandards.org, is
often down much of the time.  According to Fred Zemke, the problem is that
it is a volunteer site run by an unemployed former member who has been
going back to college, so he does not have much time or resources, though
he does try pretty hard.  Usually he gets it up again in a day.

I believe that it is highly desirable to send a message to H2 about the
Fortran 2003 FCD.  Fred Zemke asked me, "I saw an announcement that Fortran
has progressed to FCD status, is that right?"  Based on this question, I
believe that we should send H2 either an official or informal message about
the release of Fortran 2003 FCD, the relevant dates, and the location(s) of
the documents, and procedures for responding with comments.  I would like
to see such a message modeled after the announcement that Van Snyder posted
on comp.lang.fortran on October 25, with some additional material that
David Muxworthy included in his message on the comp-fortran-90 mailing list
about the UK comment process.  Following is my recommendation for a message
to H2.

[Begin message to H2]
The official public comment period for the Final Committee Draft (FCD) for
the next standard for Fortran, to be commonly known as Fortran 2003, has
been announced by ANSI.  Here is the official announcement:

***************************************************************************

The public review comment period for ISO/IEC FCD 1539-1 is from October 31,
2003 to December 15, 2003.  Public review comments that contain technical
information are permissible at the final committee draft stage.

A copy of the ISO/IEC FCD 1539-1 can be downloaded from:
http://webstore.ansi.org/ansidocstore/default.asp.

If it is the intent of the commentor to have his/her comments formally
registered, a copy of the comments should be emailed to: Deborah J. Spittle
at dspittle@itic.org and to PSA Dept. at psa@ansi.org

The will be posted every 2 weeks to the following url:
http://www.incits.org/archive/2003/in031280/in031280.htm.

***************************************************************************

All comments will receive individual attention.  Comments that notice
typographical errors, difficult exposition, or inconsistencies are
especially welcome.  Although any comment is permissible, it is not likely
that substantial technical changes will be undertaken at this time in the
revision cycle.

The Fortran FCD document is also at
http://www.dkuug.dk/jtc1/sc22/open/n3661.pdf (4.0Mb) and is available from
ftp://ftp.j3-fortran.org/j3/doc/standing/007/ in compressed PDF, postscript
and plain text formats (file sizes respectively 2.2Mb, 1.0Mb, 394Kb).

Readers who have not been following recent developments in detail might
useful a summary of the principal new features of the language.  This is at
ftp://ftp.nag.co.uk/sc22wg5/N1551-N1600/N1579.pdf or
ftp://ftp.nag.co.uk/sc22wg5/N1551-N1600/N1579.ps.gz (file sizes 101Kb and
59Kb respectively).

Readers outside of the USA should submit comments through their own
standards body.
[End of message to H2]

[End of J3 / 03-276]
