
                                                  J3/04-252

To:          J3
From:        Craig Dedo
Date:        February 16, 2004
Subject:     ISO 10646 Character Set Required

Number:           

Title:                ISO 10646 Character Set Required

Submitted By:    Craig Dedo

Status:            For Consideration

References:


Basic Functionality:
    The Fortran standard should require processors to support the major 
variants of the ISO 10646 character set.

Rationale:
    The ISO 10646 character set international standard has gained a 
large amount of popularity in the last 10 years.  All variants of the 
Microsoft Windows operating system use ISO 10646 as its standard 
character set for operating system purposes.  Almost certainly, ISO 
10646 will be a major influence in the development of software during 
the life of the next standard.

    Any user who works in an environment that has ISO 10646 support will 
benefit from this feature.

    Support for character sets is inherently part of the language 
definition.  Since there is no standard, there could be different and 
incompatible implementations from different vendors.

Estimated Impact:
    Unfortunately, there are several widely used variants of the ISO 
10646 character set.  These variants include UTF-8, UTF-16BE, UTF-16LE, 
UCS-2, and UCS-4.  Due to varying demands for memory and processing 
power, different groups of software vendors use different variants of 
ISO 10646.  Thus, it may be necessary to require support for most or all 
of the variants.

Detailed Specification:
    This feature can be implemented by specifying different kind type 
parameters for each variant of ISO 10646 that the processor supports.

    I/O facilities will need to be upgraded in order to support input 
and output of ISO 10646 characters.

    There would be no need to require the support of the proper display 
of ISO 10646 characters on an output device or input of ISO 10646 
characters using an input device.  The physical representation of ISO 
10646 characters would continue to be outside the scope of the standard.

History:
