
                                                  J3/04-253

To:          J3
From:        Craig Dedo
Date:        February 16, 2004
Subject:     Row Major Arrays

Number:           

Title:                Row Major Arrays

Submitted By:    Craig Dedo

Status:            For Consideration

References:


Basic Functionality:
    The new Fortran standard should provide support for defining arrays 
as row-major as well as the current column-major approach.  With this 
attribute, an array would have the last dimension vary most frequently 
rather than having the first dimension vary most frequently.

Rationale:
    Most other languages use row-major array storage.  If a Fortran 
program needs to pass an array to a routine written in another language, 
there are usually serious problems due to differing storage 
arrangements.  In addition, row-major storage is usually a much more 
intuitive and natural method of arranging elements in the minds of most 
people, at least in the important two-dimensional case.  The first index 
represents the primary (or most important) division, the second index 
represents the next most important, etc.  Except for matrices, I doubt 
that the efficiency of most programs would be affected.

Estimated Impact:
    This requirement has no impact on existing Fortran code.  
Column-major arrays would still be supported.  There would be little 
impact on existing column-major arrays.  The committee would need to 
define what the result of operations would be if operations combined 
row-major and column-major arrays.  Implementing this feature should 
only involve a minor cost to implementors since row-major storage is 
used in most other languages, hence the technology is well understood.

Detailed Specification:
    This could be done by defining a ROW_MAJOR keyword which would 
declare an array to have row-major storage allocation.

History:
