
                                                        J3/04-415

To:      J3
From:    Bill Long
Subject: Minor edits
Date:    25-oct-2004
---------------------

Below are a few suggested edits to f03 sections 12 and 13 which mainly
appear to be oversights during integration.  These are too trivial to
be considered as f08 proposals.  The Editor suggested a paper for
/Edit to avoid loosing track of the proposed changes. The edits would
be queued up for when we start modifying 007 again.

Minor edits in sections 12 and 13 ([page:line] numbers for 04-007):

[259:11] change "alternate return" to the small font.

[307:26] add "for the default character type" at the end of the
sentence.  Compare with the similar text at [322:11-12]. It looks like
we fixed ICHAR, but overlooked CHAR.

[331:16-17] The arrays would be a lot more readable if (/ /) were
replaced by [ ].

[335:40-41] The sentence "Note that this is true even if A has a
declared lower bound other than 1." says the same thing as the
corresponding sentence in MAXLOC [332:35] which reads "Note that this
is independent of the declared lower bounds for A."  The MAXLOC
version seems better to me.  I suspect we improved MAXLOC and
overlooked MINLOC.

[336:3]  Same issue as [335:40-41].

In several intrinsics we have KIND arguments and the sentence "If KIND
is present, the kind type parameter is that specified by the value of
KIND; otherwise..."  In some of the places we have a comma following
"otherwise" and others not. The places with the comma are mainly old
text carried over from f95, and the places without are mainly new to
f03. It appears we, with a couple of exceptions, shifted convention
with the new text.  It would be reasonable to consistently punctuate
all instances of the exact same sentence. Here's a summary of the
current usage:

f95 text with the comma: [300:33], [302:12], [303:19], [307:20],
[308:4], [316:30], [323:24], [329:29], [340:13].

f95 text without the comma: (none)

f03 new text with the comma: [320:7], [322:5]

f03 new text without the comma: [309:19], [323:4], [326:4], [326:24],
[327:5], [332:3], [335:8], [348:25], [351:15], [352:28], [358:2],
[359:13].
