
                                                           J3/05-190r1

To:       J3
From:     Stan Whitlock
Subject:  Minutes of meeting #172
Date:     11 August 2005

            Minutes of INCITS/J3 Committee Meeting #172
                       9-13 May, 2005
                     Delft, Netherlands

0.  List of papers passed at meeting #172

    No papers were passed at meeting #172 per se, or voted on.
    However, repository items were agreed upon as part of the
    concurrent WG5 meeting, and some papers were revised in response
    to straw votes taken by WG5.  This is a list which attempts to
    match repository items to the most recent paper which reflects
    the respository item as voted at Delft WG5, if there was
    a change at this meeting.

      J3-014    J3/05-181r1
      J3-023    J3/05-189
      J3-039    modified to rank <= 15 (combined total
                arrays/co-arrays)
      J3-043    J3/05-186
      J3-047    J3/05-188
      RU-003    J3/05-187 N1638 Update the deleted/obsolescent feature
                          lists
      RU-005    J3/05-185 N1637 HPF array intrinsics (Moene)
      UK-001    J3/05-183r1

    No interpretations were passed at meeting #172.

    It is presupposed one has the following WG5 documents for
    reference when reading these minutes:

      N1626 Repository of Requirements (Version of 28 April 2005)
      N1630 Resolutions of the Delft 2005 meeting
      N1631 Minutes Meeting of ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG5 May 9th - May
            13th, 2005

    As a convenience, the priorities of items as fixed by WG5 in
    N1630 and directed to J3 are summarized here:

      The following must be implemented(N1630 D6):

        J3-001 Enhanced STOP
        J3-003 EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE
        J3-010 Allow empty CONTAINS part
        J3-013 Internal subprograms as actual arguments
        J3-019 More mathematical functions
        J3-020 Allow TYPE ( <intrinsic-type-spec> )
        J3-027 ASCII arguments for LGE etc
        J3-039 == RU-001 Rank > 7
        J3-043 Pointers to contiguous memory (as modified in
               J3/05-186)
        J3-044 New Intents
        J3-046 DO CONCURRENT construct
        RU-003 Extend the obsolescent/deleted features list (as
               modified in J3/05-187)
        UK-001 Co-array Fortran (as modified in J3/05-183r1)
        UK-002 Decimal floating point arithmetic
        UK-005 Long Integers
        UK-007 Pointer function references as actual arguments

      Maintenance activities (N1630 D9)

      The following may be implemented (N1630 D6):

        J3-008 Rewrite attribute requirements
        J3-009 IO_UNIT standard derived type
        J3-012 Use ALLOCATABLE and POINTER attributes in generic
               resolution
        J3-014 Parameterized module facility (as modified in
               J3/05-185r1)
        J3-015 Updating complex parts
        J3-018 Non-null initial targets for pointers
        J3-022 Allow a polymorphic allocatable variable in intrinsic
               assignment
        J3-023 Named rank-one array constants extent inferred (as
               modified in J3/05-189)
        J3-024 EXIT from any labeled construct
        J3-038 Libm: Bessel, erf, gamma, hypot
        J3-041 Interoperability of pointers, allocatables, and
               assume-shape
        J3-042 Interoperability of optional arguments
        J3-047 BIT (was TYPELESS) objects (as modified in J3/05-188)
        J3-048 Writing Comma Separated Value CSV files
        RU-005 Extend a set of (HPF) array intrinsic functions (as
               modified in N1637)
        UK-003 Conformance to IEEE 754R
        UK-008 Pointer function references as lhs in assignment
        UK-009 Use procedureness in generic resolution

      The following are not to be pursued (N1630 D6):

        J3-007 Construct name local to construct
        J3-011 Coroutines
        J3-017 Default initial values for absent optional dummy
        J3-021 Resolve generic without invoking a procedure
        J3-031 ANDTHEN and ORELSE pseudo-functions
        J3-036 Use, Except
        J3-037 Pointers and Targets
        J3-040 Compute if actual arg is present
        J3-045 Same Assume Shape declaration
        J3-049 Select between expressions
        RU-004 Subset of Fortran Standard
        UK-010 Partial initialization of PARAMETERs

      Other items in the repository remain to have priorities
      allocated.

1.  Monday, May 9, 2005

1.1 Opening business - D. Nagle

    The meeting was called to order at 9:00 AM, Monday, May 9, 2005,
    at NEN, the Dutch Standardisation Institute, Vlinderweg 6, by the
    chair, Dan Nagle.

1.1.1 Remarks from the chair - D. Nagle

    This meeting will be conducted as a simultaneous J3-WG5 meeting,
    with chairs Dan Nagle (when in J3 mode) and John Reid (when in
    WG5 mode).

1.1.2 Adoption of agenda - D. Nagle

**  motion: adopt the agenda (moved by Hendrickson/seconded by
            Snyder): passed by unanimous consent {uc}

    The final agenda is in Appendix A

1.1.3 Approval of Meeting 171 minutes - D. Nagle

**  motion: approve meeting #171 minutes paper J3/05-166 (Snyder/
            James): uc

1.1.4 INCITS/OMC report - D. Nagle

    The annual report is due before the end of this month.  Dan Nagle
    will need to report this quickly.  D. Nagle expects to be able
    to include the Delft meeting.

    D. Nagle/V. Snyder are getting the usual support from INCITS.

1.1.5 ISO/WG5 report - V. Snyder, IR

    Nothing more to report.  A J3-UStag meeting will be held
    later in the week.

1.1.6 J11 Liaison report  - C. Rasmussen

    Craig Rasmussen has not yet shown the revised paper to J11.

1.1.7 H2 Liaison report - D. Nagle

    H2 is currently working on fitting XML into SQL.  Since XML is
    not structured and SQL is very structured, this is non-trivial.

1.1.8 IEEE 754 report (if any) - M. Ingrassia

    No report

1.1.9 Treasurer's report

    M. North did not attend and thus did not deliver a treasurer's
    report in person.  However, no J3 funds were collected or
    disbursed at this meeting.  A WG5 meeting fee will be collected.

1.1.10 Beginning membership report - D. Nagle

    Stan Whitlock being absent, Dan Nagle supplied the membership
    report.  He noted that presence/absence at an overseas meeting
    does not normally affect membership status.

    Total membership at the beginning of this meeting is 11, with
    9 members present or represented.

    Members present:

      D. Nagle (Chair)
      D. Hendrickson
      M. Ingrassia
      R. James
      B. Long
      C. Rasmussen
      V. Snyder
      M. van Waveren

    Alternates present:

      M. Cohen (alternate for Jeanne Martin)
      A. Donev (alternate for Dan Nagle, in attendance)
      T. Moene (alternate for Matthijs van Waveren, in attendance)

    Guests present:

      M. Metcalf
      Various members of WG5

1.1.11 Editor's Report - M. Cohen

    See paper J3/05-169 in the premeeting

1.1.12 Local arrangements - M. van Waveren

    Papers to be circulated on memory stick.
    Printer is available but deadline is 4:30 PM daily.
    Need volunteer to be librarian. Aleks D. volunteered.

1.1.13 Librarians report. - A. Donev

    Check with Aleks for paper numbers

1.1.14 Comments from members

    D. Nagle reported that George Mason University would like to
    host the February joint J3/WG5 meeting.  Bill Long noted that would
    be more expensive than Las Vegas, but acceptable as a one-time
    change of venue.  D. Nagle would like to organize a trip to the
    air and space museum at Dulles airport (this is not the small
    museum downtown which is one of the most-visited museums in the
    world).

    Schedule calls for completion of edits by next May, with final
    choice of features by February, 2006.

    US (J3), Russia, and UK submitted lists of recommendations for
    Repository items.  These are summarized and given code numbers in
    N1626, the WG5 Repository of Requirements.

    Usual J3 subgroups will look at repository items and recommend to
    WG5 plenary whether to adopt item as a requirement or
    recommendation for Fortran 2008.  For bigger items, subgroups will
    prepare a presentation.

    J3 working subgroups are augmented by those WG5 members in
    attendance.  All subgroup members have a vote/voice in subgroup.

    J3 repository J3/05-009 was merged into N1626.  By general
    agreement, J3 revision J3/05-009r1 was to be considered by
    subgroup as superseding N1626 in case of overlap.

1.2 Subgroup organization - D. Nagle

    JOR        Dan Nagle, chair
               Dick Hendrickson
               Michael Ingrassia
               Toon Moene
               David Muxworthy
               Makki Tanaka
    HPC        Bill Long, chair
               Aleks Donev
               Ian Chivers
               John Reid
               Wolfgang Walter
               Matthijs van Waveren
    DATA/EDIT  Malcolm Cohen, chair
               Aleks Donev
               Mike Metcalf
               Steve Morgan
               Lawrie Schonfelder
               Jane Sleightholme
               Van Snyder
    INTERP     Rob James, chair
               Malcolm Cohen
               Dick Hendrickson
               Michael Ingrassia
               David Muxworthy
               Jane Sleightholme
               Makki Tanaka

    Also a WG5 subgroup was formed to draft resolutions, chaired by
    David Muxworthy.

1.3 Subgroup meetings

1.4 Subgroup reports (3:45 pm)

    Note: A recommendation of NO means "do not pursue at this time".

  JOR report

    RU-04:  recommended NO
    RU-05:  inclined to parcel to other subgroups
            Remanded back to subgroup for further consideration.
    J3-09:  no subgroup consensus
    J3-011: recommended NO

  DATA report

    J3-014: no recommendation, still discussing
    J3-047: no recommendation, still discussing
    J3-012  recommended YES at low priority
    J3-043: recommended NO
            Subgroup thought in its current form feature was unsafe.
    J3-045: recommended NO

  HPC report

    J3-043: recommended YES
            Further discussion is in order due to conflicting
             recommendations between DATA and HPC subgroup.
    UK-001: recommended YES
            Bill Long presented a slide presentation on the feature.

  Meeting reverted to WG5 mode.

2. Tuesday, May 10, 2005  9:00 am

2.1 F200x Plenary (00-010)                        Subgroup Heads

    John Reid said that the goal for today was to have presentations
    for all the big features proposed.

2.2 Tutorials (if needed)

    Bill Long gave presentation (3 slides) on contiguous arrays J3-043

    recessed for lunch

2.2 Tutorials (if needed) (1 PM)

    Van Snyder gave presentation on parametrized modules.

    Bill Long gave presentation on TYPELESS.

      Straw vote:
        Prefer proposal as written
          (TYPELESS objects are 32 or 64 bits)   4
        Prefer arbitrary length bit strings     10
        Don't care                               4

      Subsequent votes on J3-047 are taken to refer to "variable-size
      bit strings".

      Change name from TYPELESS to BITS - unanimous consent

    This concluded presentations on the "big ticket" items.

    Straw vote on co-arrays (UK-001), bits (J3-047), parametrized
    modules (J3-014):

      do none of them                      3
      do coarrays only                     4
      do bits only                         0
      do parametrized modules only         0
      coarray + bits                       4
      bits + parametrized modules          0
      parametrized modules + coarrays      4
      all 3                                4

    Straw vote
      do coarrays                         16
      don't do coarrays                    2
      undecided                            1

    Straw vote
      do coarrays only                     7
      do bits and coarrays                 4
      parametrized modules + coarrays      4
      all 3                                4
      undecided                            1

2.3 Subgroup meetings

2.4 Subgroup reports

  JOR report

    J3-019        recommended YES

    At this point WG5 meeting and J3 meeting are happening
    simultaneously.  As J3 subgroup brings recommendation, WG5 takes
    straw votes.  WG5 straw votes are not recorded in these minutes.

      RU-05 recommended wait for more input from Russians
      J3-011 recommended NO
      J3-009 subgroup divided

  HPC report

    J3-043 recommend YES
    J3-046 recommend YES
    J3-012 recommend YES
    UK-009 recommend YES
    J3-045 recommend NO

    Plenary recessed until 2:00 PM Wednesday, to allow time for
    city walk / canal boat trip on Wednesday AM.

3. Wednesday, May 11, 2005  2:00 pm

3.1 F200x Plenary                                 Subgroup Heads

    In WG5 for straw votes, interweaved with being in J3 mode to
    report subgroup recommendations.   Dealing with repository
    items of difficulty level of 4 on the Reid scale.

    WG5 votes for each item
        A do it
        B defer it (i.e. permitted to do it as time permits)
        D don't do it in this standard
        U undecided
    but no WG5 straw votes are recorded in these J3 minutes.

  JOR report

    J3-019 recommend YES
    J3-038 recommend YES
    J3-017 subgroup split, no recommendation
    J3-037 subgroup agnostic
    J3-040 recommend NO   "the light is not worth the candle"
    RU-05  still waiting

  HPC report

    UK-02 recommend YES
    UK-03 recommend YES

  By unanimous consent, dispense with subgroup reports today.  Next
  meeting in plenary is tomorrow morning.

3.2 Tutorials (if needed) - None

3.3 Subgroup meetings

3.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm) - None

4. Thursday, May 12, 2005  9:00 am

4.1 F200x Plenary                                 Subgroup Heads

    Arjen Markus (Delft Hydraulics) joined proceedings.

  HPC report

    UK-005 recommend YES
           Note there is definitely not a requirement that the long
            integers be storage associated with DOUBLE PRECISION.
    UK-006 recommend NO
           No consensus formed after discussion.
    UK-010 recommend NO
    J3-041 recommend YES
    J3-042 recommend YES
    J3-044 recommend YES

  JOR report

    J3-003 recommend NO
    J3-007 recommend YES
    J3-031 subgroup undecided
    J3-036 recommend NO
    J3-048 recommend YES but not required
    J3-049 subgroup undecided

  DATA report

    J3-013 recommend YES
    J3-015 recommend YES
    J3-016 recommend YES for disassociated, NO for deallocated
    J3-018 recommend YES
    J3-021 recommend NO
    J3-022 recommend YES
    UK-007 recommend YES
    UK-008 recommend YES
    J3-039 recommend YES

    RU-003 assigned to JOR

  Van Snyder called US-TAG meeting for 5:45.

  Plenary will reconvene tomorrow morning by unanimous consent.

4.2 Tutorials (if needed) - None

4.3 Subgroup meetings

    Continued until 5:45 PM, and resuming tomorrow.

4.4 TAG meeting (5:45 pm)                         Van Snyder, IR

4.5 Subgroup reports

    Plenary to reconvene Friday AM and resume with this item.

5.0 Friday, May 13, 2005  9:00 am

    It's "logical Thursday".  Resume Subgroup meetings for the
    rest of the morning, then hear subgroup reports at 2 PM.

  JOR report

    RU-03 subgroup recommends adding only
            BLOCK DATA
            ENTRY
            DOUBLE PRECISION (just these literal words, not for
                              example D0 literals)
          to the obsolescent list (in particular, not .GT.-style
          comparators) , and
          Statement Functions to the deleted list
    RU-05 subgroup defined a short list of HPF functions which it
           recommends adding as intrinsics
          The intrinsics are array functions with well-defined values
           and do not presuppose working in a parallel environment.
          See paper J3/05-185.

  In WG5 mode revisited some unsettled issues previously, and
  reconfirmed by straw vote (not recorded here) that J3-047 refers to
  arbitrary-length objects not fixed-size.

5.0 [4.5] Subgroup reports  2:00 PM

    Papers will be added to repository to reflect the agreed-upon
    definitions of features.

    J3/05-183r1 John Reid will write for the postmeeting.

  INTERP report

    Rob James said there would be no Interps reported out of INTERP
    subgroup at this meeting.  However, progress was made in
    discussing papers from the premeeting, and they will be
    re-distributed for the next J3 meeting.

  JOR report

    N1636 technical corrigendum  looks right, the editorial changes
    are sufficiently small.  David Muxworthy said there are 2 minor
    editorial glitches to check.

  EDIT report

    Malcolm Cohen reported that edit subgroup processed N1621 and a
    revised version will appear at some point in the future, but not
    at this meeting.  Since WG5 has not delegated maintenance of EM
    TR to J3, that will need to wait for the next WG5 meeting.

    Since time was available a decision was made to discuss the 3's
    (items in repository with dificulty level of 3 on the Reid scale)
    in plenary without subgroup recommendation.  Those discussed and
    voted as WG5 are

      J3-008
      J3-020
      J3-027
      J3-010
      J3-023
        WG5 straw voted extending with *'s for all dimensions as
        proposed by M. Cohen and this became the version WG5 voted
        priority on;  V. Snyder will do J3-189 for the respository.
      J3-034
      J3-001
      J3-024
      J3-025
      J3-004
      J3-005
      J3-006

5.1 Closing business

5.2 Review of action items (if any)

    The editor was directed to prepare guidelines for how he wants
    to see edits (i.e. in what form).

    Future meetings 173 and 174 are in Appendix C.

    The following papers are expected from the following people in
    order to bring the Repository of Requirements into line with the
    decisions made by WG5 this week:

        J3-043 Pointers to contiguous memory (as modified in
               J3/05-186)
        RU-003 Extend the obsolescent/deleted features list (as
               modified in J3/05-187)
        UK-001 Co-array Fortran (as modified in J3/05-183r1)
        J3-014 Parameterized module facility (as modified in
               J3/05-185r1)
        J3-023 Named rank-one array constants extent inferred (as
               modified in J3/05-189)
        J3-047 BIT (was TYPELESS) objects (as modified in J3/05-188)
        RU-005 Extend a set of (HPF) array intrinsic functions (as
               modified in N1637)

5.3 Future meetings

    Information about meetings 173 and 174 is in Appendix C.

5.4 Treasurer's Report

    Submitted as paper J3/05-191.

5.5 Closing membership report

    Of 11 principal members, 8 were present, as were 1 voting and 2
    non-voting alternates, as well as numerous WG5 visitors.

    No member is in jeopardy because of meeting attendance.

    One member is in jeopardy because of not voting on 2 of the last
    3 letter ballots {C. Rasmussen}.  S. Whitlock will send him an
    e-mail reminder.

    See appendix E for details

5.6 Comments from members

    Bill Long expressed the common sentiment that the Delft meeting
    was very nicely realized.  Matthijs van Waveren thanked everyone
    for coming and asked help in cleaning up the meeting room after
    the meeting.  Members with updated papers were advised to send
    them directly to librarian, Mallory North.

**  motion: adjourn (Snyder/James): uc

Adjournment at 6:00 PM, Friday, May 13, 2005

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix A:  Final Agenda for J3 Meeting 172

----------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Monday, May 9, 2005  9:00 am
-------------------------------------
1.1 Opening business                              D. Nagle
       Remarks from the chair                     D. Nagle
       Adoption of agenda                         D. Nagle
       Approval of Meeting 171 minutes            D. Nagle
       NCITS/OMC report (if any)                  D. Nagle
       ISO/WG5 report                             Van Snyder, IR
       J11 Liaison report (if any)                C. Rasmussen
       H2 Liaison report (if any)                 D. Nagle
       IEEE 754 report (if any)                   M. Ingrassia
       Treasurer's report                         M. North
       Beginning membership report                S. Whitlock
       Local arrangements                         M. van Waveren
       Comments from members
1.2 Subgroup organization                         D. Nagle
1.3 Subgroup meetings
1.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)

2. Tuesday, May 10, 2005  9:00 am
--------------------------------------
2.1 F200x Plenary (00-010)                        Subgroup Heads
2.2 Tutorials (if needed)
2.3 Subgroup meetings
2.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)

3. Wednesday, May 11, 2005  9:00 am
----------------------------------------
3.1 F200x Plenary                                 Subgroup Heads
3.2 Tutorials (if needed)
3.3 Subgroup meetings
3.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)

4. Thursday, May 12, 2005  9:00 am
---------------------------------------
4.1 F200x Plenary                                 Subgroup Heads
4.2 Tutorials (if needed)
4.3 Subgroup meetings
4.4 TAG meeting (3:30 pm)                         Van Snyder, IR
4.5 Subgroup reports (4:00 pm)

5. Friday, May 13, 2005  9:00 am
--------------------------------------
5.1 Closing business
5.2 Review of action items (if any)
5.3 Future meetings                               M. North
5.4 Treasurer's report                            M. North
5.5 Closing membership report                     S. Whitlock
5.6 Comments from members

Adjournment

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix B: J3 REGISTER OF DOCUMENTS FOR 2004

----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   PAPERS SUBMITTED FOR J3 MEETING 172
                  DELFT, NETHERLANDS,  MAY 9 - 13, 2005
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Paper Number  Date     Submitter                Title
----------------------------------------------------------------------
J3/05-001    050411    Whitlock      Membership List
 txt
J3/05-006Ar1 050429    Whitlock      Outstanding Fortran Interpretations
 txt
J3/05-009r1  050314    Whitlock      009 - Features under consideration by
 txt                                 J3 for F03+
J3/05-013    050211    North         Guidelines for Submitting J3 Papers
 txt
J3/05-167    050305    Whitlock      J3 Fortran interp letter ballot #11 -
 txt                                 due 31-Mar-2005
J3/05-168    050315    Cohen         007 + EM
 ps,pdf
J3/05-169    050315    Cohen         Editor's report on incorporation of
 txt                                 the EM TR
J3/05-170    050406    Whitlock      Results of the J3 interp letter
 txt                                 ballot #11
J3/05-171    050425    James         Null input values and list-directed
 txt                                 UDDTIO
J3/05-172    050425    James         Namelist I/O and UDDTIO
 txt
J3/05-173    050425    James         Recursive namelist output
 txt
J3/05-174    050425    James         Structure components in namelist
 txt                                 input
J3/05-175    050425    James         Default initialization of INTENT(OUT)
 txt                                 assumed-size arrays
J3/05-176    050425    James         Polymorphism and explicit-shape or
 txt                                 assumed-size dummy arguments
J3/05-177    050425    James         Finalization of array constructors
 txt
J3/05-178    050425    James         Procedure pointers in BLOCK DATA
 txt                                 program units
J3/05-179    050425    James         Recursive declaration of procedure
 txt                                 interfaces
J3/05-180    050429    Whitlock      Results of the WG5 interp ballot
 txt                                 N1612/N1617 Nov-2004
J3/05-181    050511    Snyder        Parameterized Module facility
 txt
J3/05-181r1  050511    Snyder        Parameterized Module facility
 txt
J3/05-182    050513    Muxworthy     Second Draft Technical Corrigendum 1
 pdf
J3/05-182r1  050513    Muxworthy     Technical Corrigendum 1
 pdf
J3/05-183    050513    Reid          Co-arrays for parallel programming
 txt                                 Revision of Requirement UK-001
J3/05-183r1  050513    Reid          Co-arrays for parallel programming
 txt                                 Revision of Requirement UK-001
J3/05-184    050513    Snyder        Ballots on WG5/N1626
 txt
J3/05-185    050513    WG5           HPF array intrinsics
 txt                                 WG5 N1637
J3/05-186    050513    Long          Update of Repository item J3-043
 txt
J3/05-187    050513    /JOR          Update the deleted/obsolescent
 txt                                 feature lists
J3/05-188    050513    Long          BITS proposal

J3/05-189    050513    Snyder        Named array constant's extents from
 txt                                 its <initialization-expr>
J3/05-190    050513    Ingrassia     Meeting 172 Minutes
 txt
J3/05-191    050513    North         Meeting 172 Treasurer's Report
 txt

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix C:  Future Meetings and Distribution

Meeting Conventions:

      - Four meetings per year
      - Attempt to schedule second full week of the month
      - Attempt to schedule meeting contiguous with WG5 annual meeting

Future meeting schedule:

  173  August 8 - 12, 2005, in Las Vegas, NV
       Mallory North, acting host
       Premeeting distribution deadline:  July 25, 2005
       Premeeting distribution:  electronic
       Post-meeting distribution:  electronic

  174  November 7 - 11, 2005, in Las Vegas, NV
       Mallory North, acting host
       Premeeting distribution deadline:  October 24, 2005
       Premeeting distribution:  electronic
       Post-meeting distribution:  electronic

Committee materials availability:

Agenda and meeting notice available at the J3 web site.

Sent individually to other interested parties that specifically
request to be sent the material either via surface mail or electronic
mail.

   REQUIREMENT:  Distribution 4 weeks prior to meeting (SD-2 4.3.3)

Pre- and post-meeting distribution available at the J3 web site.

Sent individually to other interested parties that specifically
request to be sent the material via electronic mail.

   REQUIREMENT:  Distribution of premeeting 2 weeks prior to meeting.
                 (documents for action - two week rule: SD-2 4.3.4:1)

Meeting minutes are available at the J3 web site.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
J3 World Wide Web site URL:  http://www.j3-fortran.org
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix D:  Committee Organization

D.1 Officers and Management

Chair                    D. Nagle
International Rep.       V. Snyder
Secretary                S. Whitlock
Treasurer                M. North
Librarian                M. North
Editor                   M. Cohen (WG5 appointment)
Maintenance              S. Whitlock
Vocabulary Rep.          none
Future Meetings          M. North
Membership List          S. Whitlock
H2 Liaison               D. Nagle
J11 Liaison              C. Rasmussen
IEEE 754R Working Group  M. Ingrassia

D.2 Subgroups

JOR:       Responsible for the maintenance of the Journal of
           Development (standing document 004)

           S. Whitlock (head), R. Bleikamp, D. Hendrickson, D. Nagle

DATA:      Responsible for language design topics related to data and
           data structures

           M. Cohen (head), A. Donev, J. Martin, V. Snyder

INTEROP:   Responsible for interoperability with C

           B. Long (head), M. Ingrassia, R. James, M. van Waveren

HPC:       Responsible for topics in High Performance Computing

           B. Long (head), R. James, C. Rasmussen, M. van Waveren

INTERP:    Responsible for evaluating interpretation requests,
           providing responses to such requests, and maintaining
           standing document 006

           S. Whitlock (head), R. Bleikamp, M. Cohen

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix E:  Membership summary

J3 Meeting Attendance (Principal Members)
Meeting #                     164  165  166  167  168  169  170  171  172
Location (state)              NV   NV   NV   NV   NV   NV   NV   NV   Delft
Date (month year)             04   08   11   03   05   08   11   02   02
                              03   03   03   04   04   04   04   05   05
Name              Affiliation
Bleikamp, R                HP E**  V    V    V    R    V    R    V    A
Hendrickson, D           self V    V    V    V    A    V    V    V    V
Ingrassia, M              Sun V    V    V    V    V    V    A    V    V
James, R                  IBM A    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
Long, W                  Cray V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
Martin, J                self V    V    A    V    V    V    V    V    R
Nagle, D                 self V    V    R    V    V    V    V    V    V
Rasmussen, C             LANL                     V    V    A    V    A
Snyder, V         JPL/Caltech V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
van Waveren, M        Fujitsu R    V    A    A**  V**  V    A    V    V
Whitlock, S             Intel V    A    V    V    V    V    V    V    A

J3 Letter Ballot Participation (Principal Members)
Meeting #                     163a 163b 163c 163  164  168  169  170  171
Date (month year)             12   12   02   03   07   08   10   12   03
                              02   02   03   03   03   04   04   04   05
Name              Affiliation                     I7   I8   I9   I10  I11
Bleikamp, R                HP V    V    V    V    V    A    A**  V**  V
Hendrickson, D           self V    V    V    V    V    A    V    V    V
Ingrassia, M              Sun A    RP   RP   RP   A    V    A**  V    V
James, R                  IBM E    E    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
Long, W                  Cray V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
Martin, J                self      V    V    V    V    A    V    V    V
Nagle, D                 self V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
Rasmussen, C             LANL                          E    A    V    A**
Snyder, V         JPL/Caltech V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V
van Waveren, M        Fujitsu E    E    R    V    V    V    R    V    V
Whitlock, S             Intel V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V    V

V   present and voting              voting alternates:
R   absent but represented          M. Cohen, alternate for J. Martin
A   absent and not represented
P   present and not voting          Non-voting attendees:
RP  represented by previous member  A. Donev, alternate for R. Bleikamp
E   Excused                         T. Moene, alternate for M. van Waveren
Q   Resigned
**  missed 2 of last 3 meetings/votes
*** lost membership

Total Membership at beginning of Meeting 171  11
Majority                                       6
Quorum                                         4
Total Membership at end of Meeting 171        11
Total Members Attended or Represented at 171   8
Total Attendees at Meeting 171                11
  visitors from WG5

membership changes since last meeting:
  None

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix F:  Membership Roster

The Membership Roster is not reproduced here.  The current Membership
Roster may be found on the J3 web site at http://www.j3-fortran.org by
clicking on the tab "J3 Members" and then clicking on the pointer to
"full membership list".
