9 August 2005                                                 J3/05-210r1

Subject :   First draft of edits to allow POINTER function results as
            actual arguments
From:       Van Snyder
References: WG5/N1626-UK-007

1. Detailed specification

Allow a function result that has the POINTER attribute to be an actual
argument corresponding to a dummy argument that does not have the
POINTER attribute, even if the dummy argument does not have INTENT(IN),
provided the function result is associated with a target.  The target
of the function result becomes argument associated with the dummy
argument.

2.  Syntax

There is no new syntax.

3.  Edits

[81:35] In the fourth paragraph after C546 -- the one that begins "If
no INTENT..." -- replace "associated actual argument" by "argument
associated entity".

[268:1-15] In the first paragraph of 12.4.1, use "correspond" in the
appropriate form instead of "associate".  In detail:

Replace "is associated with" by "corresponds to" at [268:5], [268:7-8],
[268:9], and [268:10].

Replace "be associated with" by "correspond to" at [268:13], [268:14],
and [268:15].

Then add a new paragraph:

"Except in references to intrinsic inquiry functions, if the dummy
argument is not a pointer and the corresponding actual argument is a
pointer, the actual argument shall be pointer associated with a target
and the dummy argument becomes argument associated with that target.
Otherwise the dummy argument becomes argument associated with the
corresponding actual argument.

[269:20-22] Delete the paragraph that begins "Except in references to
intrinsic inquiry functions...."

[270:38-39] In the paragraph that begins "If a nonpointer dummy argument
has INTENT(OUT)..." replace "actual argument" by "argument associated
entity" and replace "corresponding actual argument by "argument
associated entity".

[418:16-17] Replace the first sentence of the second paragraph of
16.4.5 Establishing associations -- the one that begins "For argument
association..." -- by "For argument association, if the dummy argument
is not a pointer and the corresponding actual argument is a pointer,
the corresponding actual argument shall be pointer associated with a
target and the pre-existing entity is that target.  Otherwise the
pre-existing entity is the corresponding actual argument.  In either
case, the associating entity is the dummy argument."
