
                                                  J3/06-212r1

To:      J3
From:    Bill Long
Subject: C1 : backward compatibility
Date:    16-aug-2006
Reference: 06-007
---------------------

Editorial:
----------

In "1.6.2 New intrinsic data type and operator" The second paragraph
reads "... new intrinsic operator .XOR., which ... has a different
precedence than in previous revisions of ISO/IEC 1539".  This could be
misread as saying there was an intrinsic operator .XOR. in earlier
revisions, but with a different precedence.  It would be better to
more directly state the change.

Edit:

[3:15-16] At the end of the second paragraph of "1.6.2 New intrinsic
data type and operator" replace "has a different precedence than in
previous revisions of this part of ISO/IEC 1539" with "has a different
precedence than that of a user-defined operator and a different syntax
than that of a user-defined unary operator".

Technical:
----------

In the subclause on Fortran 2003 compatibility the second sentence
correctly includes "that does not use a derived type called BITS, and
does not use a user-defined operator called .XOR.".  This same
qualification is missing from the subsequent two subclauses, though it
is needed there as well.

Edits:

[3:24] In the second sentence of "1.6.4 Fortran 95 compatibility"
replace "Fortran 95 program remains" with "Fortran 95 program that
does not use a derived type called BITS, and does not use a
user-defined operator called .XOR., remains".

[4:8] In the second sentence of "1.6.5 Fortran 90 compatibility"
replace "Fortran 90 program that does not use" with "Fortran 90
program that does not use a derived type called BITS, does not use a
user-defined operator called .XOR., and does not use".
