
                                                 J3/06-211r1

Date: 15 August 2006
To : J3
From: John Wallin
Subject: Comments on the index


This is Section 4 of 05-207, with line numbers at line 12 revised to
refer to 06-007.  Some index items are bold and some are not. Ones
generated by \tdef are generated bold automatically, while those
generated by \mindex have to be made bold explicitly. Some consistency
in the reason for bold index items ought to be adopted, unless the
existing rule is judged to be adequate. \tdef sets text in "term
definition" font and puts it in the index in "term definition" font,
while \tdeff sets text in "term definition" font without putting it in
the index, so if one wants an index term differerent from the item
that appears in "term definition" font, say the singular instead of
the plural, "tdeff should be used, followed by \mindex. If the item
should appear in bold face in the index, that needs to be done
explicitly using the \mindexd macro (\mindexd* sets the text in
ordinary font and the index in "term definition" font).

Formatting issue - Page 657 is only one column and runs past the
bottom of the page.
[ADDED]

Combine under the category of "abstract", "abstract interface",
"abstract interface block", and "abstract type"
[ADDED]

Make "argument association" subsidiary to "argument", i.e.,
\mindex{argument!association}. Combine "argument keywords" into
"argument keyword", and make it subsidiary to "argument".

Make "array constructor", "array intrinsic assignment statement",
"array pointer" and "array section" subsidiary to "array". Combine
"array elements" into"array element" and make it subsidiary to
"array".  `Make "array element order" subsidiary to "array!element".

Make "ASCII character set", "ASCII character type" and "ASCII
collating sequence" subsidiary to "ASCII".

Make "assignment statement" subsidiary to "assignment".

Combine "associate names" into "associate name".

Make "pointer association status" subsidiary to "association".

Combine "attributes" into "attribute". Make "attribute specification
statements" subsidiary to "attribute".

Index the KIND attribute.

Combine "belongs" into "belong".

Do we need both "branch target statement" and "Branching", since
they're both on the same page?  Replace both by "branching".

Make "character context", "character intrinsic assignment statement",
character intrinsic operation", "character intrinsic operator",
character length parameter", "character literal constant", "character
relational intrinsic operation", "character sequence type",
character set", "character storage unit", character string",
"character string edit descriptor" and "character type" subsidiary to
"character".

Make "common association" (if it continues to exist as a term),
"common block" and "common block storage sequence" subsidiary to
"common".

Combine "components" into"component". Make "component" and "component
keyword" subsidiary to "component". Combine "Component order" into
"component order" and it them subsidiary to "component".

Delete "connected files" (since "connected" is indexed on the same
page).

Make "constant subobject" subsidiary to "constant".

Combine "Construct association" into "construct association". Make it
and "construct entity" subsidiary to "construct".

Combine "control edit descriptors" into "control edit descriptor".

Combine "data edit descriptors" into "data edit descriptor". Make it
and "data entity", "data object", "data object reference", "data
pointer", "data transfer" and "data type" subsidiary to
"data". Combine "data transfer input statements", "data transfer
output statements" and "data transfer statements" into "data transfer
input/output statement" and make it subsidiary to "data!transfer".

Combine "declarations" into "declaration".

Combine "default-initialized" into "default initialization". Make
"default character", "default initialization", "default integer",
"default logical" and "default real" subsidiary to "default".

Make "defined assignment", "defined binary operation", defined
elemental assignment statement", "defined elemental operation" and
"defined operation" subsidiary to "defined". Make "defined assigned
statement" subsidiary to "defined!assignment". Delete "defined unary
operation".  Decapitalize "Delimiters".

Combine "derived types" into "derived type".

Make "derived type determination" subsidiary to "derived type".

Make "direct access input/output statement" subsidiary to "direct
access".

Combine "dummy arguments" into "dummy argument". Make it and "dummy
array", "dummy data object" and "dummy procedure" subsidiary to
"dummy".

Combine "edit descriptors" into "edit descriptor". Refer "edit
descriptor" to "format descriptor" (which is made singular below).

Change "element array assignment (FORALL)" to "elemental array
assignment (FORALL)". Make it and "elemental intrinsic function",
"elemental operation" and "elemental procedure" subsidiary to
"elemental".

Combine "executable constructs" into "executable construct". Make it
and "executable statement" subsidiary to "executable".

Combine "expressions" into "expression".

Make "extension operations", "extension operator" and "extension type"
subsidiary to "extension".

Make "field width" subsidiary to "field".

Combine "files" into "file". Make "file access", "file connection",
"file inquiry", "file position" and "file storage unit" subsidiary to
"file". Make "file connection statements" subsidiary to "file
connection".

Make "file inquiry statement" subsidiary to "file inquiry". Make "file
positioning statements" subsidiary to "file position".

Combine "final subroutines" into "final subroutine".

Combine "finalizable", "finalizatioion" and "finalized".

Replace "format descriptors" by "format descriptor".

Make "formatted data transfer", "formatted input/output statement" and
"formatted record" subsidiary to "formatted".

Make "function reference", "function result" and "function statement"
subsidiary to "function".

Combine "Generic names" into "generic name". Replace "generic
procedure references" by "generic procedure reference". Make them and
"generic identifier", "generic interface", "generic interface block"
and "generic procedure references" subsidiary to "generic".

Combine "global entities" into"global entity". Make it and "global
identifier" subsidiary to "global".

Replace "Graphic characters" by "graphic character".

Make "host association" and "host scoping unit" subsidiary to "host".

Delete "inheritance associated" index entry, and add its reference
as part of "inheritance association."

Make "initialization expression" subsidiary to "initialization".

Replace "Input statements" by "input statement".

Make "input/output list" and "input/output statement" subsidiary to
"input/output".

Make "inquiry function" and "inquiry, type parameter" subsidiary to
"inquiry".

Make "instance of a subprogram" subsidiary to "instance".

Make "integer constant", "integer editing", "integer model" and
"integer type" subsidiary to "integer".

Make "interface body", "interface block" and "interface of a
procedure" subsidiary to "interface".

Combine "internal files" into "internal file".

Combine "intrinsic operations" into "intrinsic operation". Combine
"intrinsic procedures" into "intrinsic procedure". Combine "intrinsic
types" into "intrinsic type". Make them and "intrinsic assignment
statement", "intrinsic binary operation", "intrinsic module" and
"intrinsic unary operation" subsidiary to "intrinsic". Index
"intrinsic function" and "intrinsic subroutine".

Make "ISO 10646 character set" and "ISO 10646 character type"
subsidiary to "ISO 10646".

Make "length of a character string" and "length type parameter"
subsidiary to "length".

Replace "letters" by "letter".

Combine "Lexical tokens" into "lexical token".

Combine "local identifiers" into "local identifier". Make it, "local
entity" and "local variable" subsidiary to "local".

Combine "logical intrinsic operations" into "logical intrinsic
operation". Make it and "logical intrinsic assignment statement",
logical intrinsic operator" and "logical type" subsidiary to
"logical".

Combine "masked array assignment" and "masked array assignment
(WHERE)".

Make "module procedure", "module reference" and "module subprogram"
subsidiary to "module".

Make "named common block", "named constant" and "named file"
subsidiary to "named".

Combine "Nonexecutable statements" into "nonexecutable statement".

Combine "numeric intrinsic operations" into "numeric intrinsic
operation". Combine "numeric types" into "numeric type". Make them and
"numeric conversion", "numeric intrinsic assignment statement",
"numeric intrinsic operator", "numeric relational intrinsic operation"
and "numeric sequence type" subsidiary to "numeric".

Combine "obsolescent features" into "obsolescent feature".

Combine "operands" into "operand".

Combine "operations" into "operation".

Combine "operators" into "operator". Make "operator precedence"
subsidiary to "operator".

Replace "Output statements" by "output statement".

Combine "PARAMETER" into "PARAMETER attribute".

Make "parent component", "parent data transfer statement" and "parent
type" subsidiary to "parent".

Combine "pointer associated" into "pointer association". Make it and
"pointer assignment" subsidiary to "pointer".  Make "pointer
assignment statement" subsidiary to "pointer assignment". Make
"pointer association status" subsidiary to "pointer association".

Combine "Preconnection" into "preconnected". Make "preconnected files"
subsidiary to "preconnected".

Combine "procedure references" into "procedure reference". Make it and
"procedure designator", "procedure interface" and "procedure
pointer" subsidiary to "procedure".

Make "real model", "real part" and "real type" subsidiary to "real".

Replace "record lengths" by "record length". Make it, "record file"
and "record number" subsidiary to "record".

Combine "relational intrinsic operations" into "relational intrinsic
operation". Make it and "relational intrinsic operator" subsidiary to
"relational".

Combine "representation methods" into "representation method".

Make "sequence association", "sequence structure" and "sequence type"
subsidiary to "sequence".

Make "sequential access input/output statement" subsidiary to
"sequential access".

Make "shape conformance" subsidiary to "shape".

Make "size of a common block" and "size of a storage sequence"
subsidiary to "size".

Remove "specific interface block".

Replace "Specific names" by "specific name".

Combine "specifications" into "specification". Make "specification
expression", "specification function" and "specification inquiry"
subsidiary to "specification".

Combine "Statement functions" into "statement function". Replace
"statements" by "statement". Make "statement entity", "statement
function", "statement label" and "statement order" subsidiary to
"statement".

Index "statement!ASSOCIATE", "statement!CLASS", "statement!SELECT
TYPE", "statement!TYPE" and "statement!TYPE IS".

Combine "storage associated" and "Storage association into "storage
association". Make them, "storage sequence" and "storage" unit
subsidiary to "storage".

Make "structure component" and "structure constructor" subsidiary to
"structure".

Combine "subobjects" into "subobject".

Make "subroutine reference" and "subroutine subprogram" subsidiary to
"subroutine".

Make "subscript triplet" subsidiary to "subscript".

Combine "transformational functions" into "transformational function".

Combine "type declaration statements" into "type declaration
statement". Make it, "type compatible", "type conformance", "type
equality", "type incompatible", "type parameter" and "type specifier"
subsidiary to "type". Combine "Type parameter order" into "type
parameter order". Make it, "type parameter inquiry", and "type
parameter keyword" subsidiary to "type parameter".

Combine "ultimate components" into "ultimate component".

Make "unformatted input/output statement" subsidiary to "unformatted
data transfer".

Combine "use associated" and "Use association" into "use association".

Combine "variables" into "variable".

------------------------------------

Changes withdraw from the original 06-211


Should we search for index terms, and add occurrences of them that are
not indexed to the index?  Index 12.0 [297:7,11] and 12.4.1 [311:1]
for "argument."
[WITHDRAWN]

Do we need "assumed-shape array", "assumed-size array" and "automatic
array" in addition to "array!assumed-shape", "array!assumed-size"
and "array!automatic"?
[WITHDRAWN]

If we do need both "array!automatic" and "automatic array", make
"automatic array" and "automatic data object" both subsidiary to
"automatic".
[WITHDRAWN]

Make "explicit formatting", "explicit initialization" and "explicit
interface" subsidiary to "explicit".
[WITHDRAWN]

Make "external file", "external linkage", "external procedure",
"external procedure", "external subprogram" and "external unit"
subsidiary to "external".
[WITHDRAWN]

Make "internal procedure", "internal subprogram" and "internal unit"
subsidiary to "internal".
[WITHDRAWN]

Remove "conversion!numeric" since "numeric!conversion" is
indexed. "numeric!editing" is indexed but "editing!numeric" is not,
etc.
[WITHDRAWN]
