                                                                    07-227
To:      J3
From:    Van Snyder
Subject: Default initialization
Date: 2007 May 10

Introduction
------------

The term "initialization target" is defined twice -- once for data targets
and once for procedure targets.  The first definition is used once; the
second is used twice, but the second use of it is easily avoided.  The
definitions should be moved into the constraints where they are
referenced.

There are several places that say "... the type has a direct component
that has default initialization."  It would be simpler to define whether a
type has default initialization and just use the phrase "the type has
default initialization.

Edits
-----

[68:15-17] Overlooks vector subscripts and CONTIGUOUS.  Editor: Replace
"and the values ... value" by  " all nondeferred type parameters of the
pointer have the same values as the corresponding type parameters of the
target, and the target is contiguous if the pointer has the CONTIGUOUS
attribute."

[68:31]  Editor: Replace "variable that is an initialization target" by "a
nonallocatable variable that has the TARGET and SAVE attributes and does
not have a vector subscript".

[68:36-37] Editor: Delete the paragraph.

[69:18+] Editor:  add a paragraph

"A type has default initialization if <component-initialization> is
specified for any direct component of the type.  An object has default
initialization if it is of a type that has default initialization."

[69:Note 4.37] Editor: Delete "specified in the definition of the type"
because default initialization can't be specified anywhere else.

[105:2] Editor: Delete "has been specified with" and "in a type
definition".

[307:10-11] Editor: Delete "A procedure ... if it is.  Move the remainder
of the paragraph to replace "an initialization target" at [306:30].

[319:13-14] Editor: Replace "for which" by "that has" and delete "is
specified for a direct component".

[484:2-3] Editor: Replace "is an ultimate ... component," by "has default
initialization" and replace "an initialization target" by "not a reference
to the intrinsic function NULL" (cf. 484:16-17).

[500:17-19] Editor: Replace "4.5" by "4.5.4.5" and delete "Nonpointer ...
by default."

[501:5] Editor: Insert "with <null-init>" after "initialization" twice.
