
                                                              07-235

To:       J3
From:     Stan Whitlock
Subject:  Minutes of meeting #180
Date: 2007 May 15

            Minutes of INCITS/J3 Committee Meeting #180
                          7-11 May 2007
                Emerald Suites, Las Vegas, NV, USA

0.  List of papers passed at meeting #180

    This is a list of the paper numbers that passed at meeting
    #180, including interpretations.  The reference is to the
    latest revision on the J3 server after the meeting, not to
    the actual revision that was voted upon.  The motions below
    reference the actual revision voted upon.

07-182   edits    07-197   opt1     07-209r1          07-221r1
07-183r2          07-198r3          07-210            07-222
07-184r2          07-199r1          07-211r1 opt1     07-223
07-185r2          07-200r1          07-212r3          07-224r1
07-187r1          07-201r1          07-213r3          07-225
07-188r1          07-202r2          07-214            07-226
07-189r2          07-203r1          07-215 no edits   07-227r1
07-190r3          07-204            07-216            07-228
07-192r1          07-205r1          07-217            07-229
07-193r1          07-206r1          07-218            07-230
07-194r1          07-207r3          07-219            07-231
07-195r1          07-208r1          07-220   opt2

    The interpretations passed by this meeting were:

      07-213   interp F03/0089      07-231   interp F03/0090

1. Monday, May 7, 2007  8:00 AM
-------------------------------

    The J3 meeting (#180) was called to order at 8:00 AM, Monday,
    May 7, 2007, at the Emerald Suites, Las Vegas, NV, USA,
    by the J3 chair, Dan Nagle.

1.1 Opening business                             D. Nagle

    The Chairman welcomed everyone.

1.1.1 Remarks from the chair                     D. Nagle

    Dan welcomed Jim Xia, the new principle representation from
    IBM, replacing Rob James.

    Dan reapplied for the J3 chairmanship;  since there were no
    other volunteers, Dan will likely be chair again.

1.1.2 Adoption of agenda                         D. Nagle

**  motion: Adopt the agenda as amended (moved by Dick Hendrickson/
            seconded by Michael Ingrassia): passed by unanimous consent
            {uc}

1.1.3 Approval of Meeting 179 minutes            D. Nagle

**  motion: Approve paper 07-181, the minutes of meeting #179
            (Snyder/Long): uc

1.1.4 INCITS/SDB report (if any)                 D. Nagle

    The J3 annual report is due before meeting 181.  Van Snyder will
    present it to INCITS at their West Coast meeting.

1.1.5 OWG-V report (if any)                      D. Nagle

    The Other Working Group-V met in Padua.  They discussed software
    vulnerability.  They have representatives from C, C#, Ada, and
    Fortran;  C++ is not represented.

    There is a "specials functions" subgroup that will need Fortran
    bindings - Van Snyder expressed interest in reviewing this work.

    There may be a new C standard to add safety and reliability
    features.

1.1.6 ISO/WG5 report                             Van Snyder, IR

    There will be a USTAG meeting this week.

    The next WG5 meeting is a joint meeting with J3 in London in
    August, 2007.

1.1.7 J11 Liaison report (if any)                C. Rasmussen

    Craig Rasmussen not present.

    Dan Nagle mentioned that maybe the Interoperability TR {TRs are
    now called TSs} should specify C functions like the C standard
    does.

1.1.8 H2 Liaison report (if any)                 D. Nagle

    Nothing new to report.

1.1.9 IEEE 754 report (if any)                   M. Ingrassia

    The draft 1.4.0 ballot has ended;  there are many technical
    issues to resolve.

1.1.10 Treasurer's report                         V. Snyder

    The new J3 bank account is still named the "J3 COBOL" committee.
    Van is holding Lynn Berra's $102 seed money until this is
    resolved.

    $3092.07 is current balance.  There is a reimbursement to Rich
    Bleikamp for web sit work still pending.

    The meeting 180 fee is $50.00 .

1.1.11 Beginning membership report                S. Whitlock

    Total Membership at beginning of Meeting 180     11
    Majority                                          6
    Quorum                                            4

    members                               alternates

    R. Bleikamp
    D. Hendrickson
    M. Ingrassia
    J. Xia                                K. Li
    B. Long                               J. Brixius
    J. Martin                             M. Cohen
    D. Nagle                              A. Donev
    C. Rasmussen                          C. Rickett
    V. Snyder                             R. Maine
    M. van Waveren                        T. Moene
    S. Whitlock

    Jim Xia replaced Rob James as IBM's principle representative.  IBM
    was in jeopardy of losing membership because of missing 2 of the
    last 3 meetings.  After attending this meeting, IBM will still be
    in jeopardy of losing membership because of missing 2 of the last
    3 meetings;  IBM will have to attend J3 meeting #181 in order to
    not lose membership.

    Matthijs van Waveren was in jeopardy of losing membership because
    of missing 2 of the last 3 meetings.  He was represented last
    meeting and is attending this meeting so his membership is no longer
    in jeopardy at the end of this meeting.

    No one is in jeopardy of losing membership because of missing 2 of
    the last 3 letter ballots.

    Attendance - J3 members:
      D. Hendrickson
      M. Ingrassia
      B. Long
      J. Martin
      D. Nagle
      C. Rasmussen
      V. Snyder
      M. van Waveren
      S. Whitlock
      J. Xia

    J3 alternates present:
      M. Cohen (alternate for J. Martin - in attendance)
      A. Donev (alternate for D. Nagle - in attendance)
      C. Rickett (alternate for C. Rasmussen - in attendance)

    Visitors
      None

1.1.12 Local arrangements                         D. Nagle

    Michael Ingrassia is acting local host and will provide supplies as
    requested.

    We are rotating hosts:  BSI will be host the WG5/J3 meeting #181 in
    Aug-2007;  Stan Whitlock will host J3 meeting #182 in Nov-2007.

1.1.13 Comments from members

    Van Snyder polled the group for interest in meeting At Cal Tech in
    Aug-2008.

    Matthijs van Waveren reported that OpenMP v3.0 is planned for
    completion this calendar year.

    No other comments from members were recorded.

1.2 Subgroup organization                         D. Nagle

    J3 is divided into its usual three subgroups, /JOR, /DTAT, and
    /HPC, to work on integration of edits against 07-007r1.

    Everyone should read 007, 011r1, 07-075, 076, 077, 078, 079, and
    080 from /EDIT.

    /JOR    Whitlock (head), Hendrickson, Nagle

            07-007 chapters 1,2,3,7,8,13
            initial papers: 183, 184, 185, 190, 191, 197, 198, 200,
                           201, 204, 214, 215

    /DATA   Cohen (head), Ingrassia, Martin, Snyder

            07-007 chapters 4, 5, 6
            initial papers: 186, 187, 188, 189, 192, 193, 194, 195,
                           202, 203, 211

    /HPC    Long (head), Donev, Rasmussen, Rickett, van Waveren, Xia

            07-007 chapters co-arrays, 15
            initial papers: 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212

    /EDIT   Cohen (head)

            initial papers: 182, 199

    /interp Whitlock (head), anyone he thinks can help

            initial papers: 196, 213 (which is interp F03/0089)

1.3 Subgroup meetings (9:04 AM)

1.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 PM)

  /JOR

    No further action will be taken on 07-191 "Comments on Clause 9"
    [Snyder].


  /J3

    The list of papers for voting, discussion, or action later in
    the week was discussed.

  Recessed at 4:45 PM

2. Tuesday, May 8, 2007  8:00 AM
--------------------------------

[to be completed in r1]
