To: J3                                                        07-325
From: Bill Long
Subject: BOZ editing
Date: 2007 October 30
References: J3/07-007r3, WG5/N1695


Discussion

Part 3 of paper N1695 retains the ability for formatted input and
output of values of type REAL and COMPLEX (as well as INTEGER) using
the Z, O, or B edit descriptors. Edits are provided to put this
capability back into the f08 draft. These are largely an adaptation of
subclause 10.7.2.4 Bits editing [285:1-24] in J3/07-007r2. As was the
case in the 07-007r2 draft, these edit descriptors are removed from
the section in "Integer editing". Also carried forward are fixes to
the defective f03 description of BOZ editing for integers that were
fixed as part of the bits feature.

Edits to 07-007r3:

Apply the following edits to subclause 10.7.2.2 Integer editing:

[265:35] In para 1, replace "The I<w>, I<w.m>, B<w>, B<w.m>, O<w>,
O<w.m>, Z<w>, and Z<w.m> edit descriptors" with "The I<w> and I<w.m>
edit descriptors".

[265:37-38] Replace the last sentence of para 1 with "The G, B, O, and
Z edit descriptors also may be used to edit integer data (10.7.5.2.1,
\ref{B, O, and Z editing})."

[265:41-266:2] Delete the second and third sentences of para 3: "For
the B, O, ... hexadecimal digits."

[266:3] Delete para 4: "If the output list item is of type bits..."

[266:7-9] Delete para 6: "The output field for the B<w> ... leading
zeros."

[266:9+] Delete Note 10.10: "A binary, octal, ...".

[266:10-11] In the first sentence of para 7, delete ", B<w.m>, O<w.m>,
and Z<w.m>" and ", B<w>, O<w>, and Z<w>".

------------------

Apply the following edit to subclause 10.7.2.3.1 Real and Complex
editing / General:

[266:19-20] Replace the last sentence of para 1 with "The G, B, O, and
Z edit descriptors also may be used to edit real and complex data
(10.7.5.2.1, \ref{B, O, and Z editing})."

-------------------

[271:1-] Between Note 10.15 and 10.7.3, add a new subclause:

"10.7.2a B, O, and Z editing

The B<w>, B<w.m>, O<w>, O<w.m>, Z<w>, and Z<w.m> edit descriptors
indicate that the field to be edited occupies <w> positions, except
when <w> is zero. When <w> is zero, the processor selects the field
width. On input, <w> shall not be zero. The input/output list item
shall be of type integer, real, or complex.

On input, <m> has no effect.

In the input field for the B, O, and Z edit descriptors the character
string shall consist of binary, octal, or hexadecimal digits (as in
R413, R414, R415) in the respective input field. The lower-case
hexadecimal digits a through f in the hexadicimal input field are
equivalent to the corresponding upper-case hexadecimal digits.

The input field is edited as if the input list item had an internal
value identical to the internal value represented by the bit sequence
denoted by the sequence of binary, octal, or hexadecimal digits in the
input field, padded with zero-bits on the left if needed.

The output field for the B<w>, O<w>, and Z<w> descriptors consist of
zero or more leading blanks followed by the internal value in a form
identical to the digits of a binary, octal, or hexadecimal constant,
respectively, denoting a bit sequence whose internal representation
has the same value and without leading zeros.

Note 10.x
   A binary, octal, or hexadecimal constant always consists of at
   least one digit or hexadecimal digit.
[end note]

R1021  <hex-digit-string>   <<is>>   <hex-digit> [ <hex-digit> ] ...

The output field for the B<w.m>, O<w.m>, and Z<w.m> edit descriptor is
the same as for the B<w>, O<w>, and Z<w> edit descriptor, except that
the <digit-string> or <hex-digit-string> consists of at least <m>
digits.  If necessary, sufficient leading zeros are included to
achieve the minimum of <m> digits.  The value of <m> shall not exceed
the value of <w>, except when <w> is zero.  If <m> is zero and the
internal value is zero, the output field consists of only blank
characters. When <m> and <w> are both zero, and the internal value is
zero, one blank character is produced."
