To: J3                                                        08-116
From: Bill Long
Subject: UTI 146, B, O, Z edit descriptors
Date: 2008 January 25
References: J3/08-007


Discussion for UTI 146, page 277:

The editor points out that the text in paragraph 4 (describing input)
of the section on B, O, and Z editing is not compatible with paragraph
5 (describing output). In f03 there is no paragraph corresponding to
the new paragraph 4, [277:10-11], so it is not clear how the semantics
could have changed for the integer case. In addition, the existing
paragraph 5 [277:12-14] is defective in that it only makes sense for a
positive integer value.  This is a long-standing defect in the
standard, and now even more defective with the inclusion of
input/output list items of type real. The wording for both input and
output using B, O, or Z editing should be consistent with the way the
INT and REAL intrinsics treat boz constants. Furthermore, as is the
case with the G edit descriptor that also can be used with
input/output list items of multiple types, separate cases are needed
for integer and real, at least for input.

Edits to J3/08-007:

[277:10-11] In 10.7.2.4 B, O, and Z editing, replace paragraph 4 with:

"For a <boz-literal-constant>, X, that specifies the same bit sequence
as the digits of the input field, the value is INT(X) if the input
list item is of type integer and REAL(X) if the input list item is of
type real or complex."

[277:14] In 10.7.2.4 B, O, and Z editing, paragraph 5, replace "with
the same value" with "with the same bit pattern".
