To: J3                                                        08-159
From: Bill Long
Subject: Generic I/O procs unspecified?
Date: 2008 April 25
References: J3/08-007r2 (WG5/N1723)


Discussion:

In the first paragraph of 9.6.4.7.4 "Resolving defined input/output
procedure references", we have a reference to 9.6.4.7, which includes
this text.  I think we really mean 9.6.4.7.3 where the generic
interfaces are listed.

When I brought this to the editor's attention during the review of the
first CD draft, he noted that we don't actually say which generic
interfaces go with what type of operation, although it is "obvious"
from the names. Unless someone can find where this is specified in the
standard, we need normative text to cover the connections.

Unrelated, but in the same section, at the end of 9.6.4.7.4:p4 we say
"This reference shall not be to a dummy procedure that is not present,
or to a disassociated procedure pointer."  This requirement would
apply to any procedure reference.  There seems to be no reason to
repeat the requirement for this specific case.


Edits to J3/08-007r2 (WG5/N1723):

[220:p1] At the end of paragraph 1 of 9.6.4.7.3 "Defined input/output
procedures", add:

"The <dtio-generic-spec>s for these procedures are READ(FORMATTED),
READ(UNFORMATTED), WRITE(FORMATTED), and WRITE(FORMATTED), for
formatted input, unformatted input, formatted output, and unformatted
output respectively."

[225:p1] In the first paragraph of 9.6.4.7.4 "Resolving defined
input/output procedure references", replace the reference "9.6.4.7"
[\ref{User-defined derived-type input/output}) with "9.6.4.7.3"
[\ref{Defined input/output procedures}].

[225:p4] In the last paragraph of 9.6.4.7.4 "Resolving defined
input/output procedure references", delete the last sentence: "This
reference shall not be ... disassociated procedure pointer."





