To: J3                                                    08-131r1
From: Bill Long
Subject: Moving some coarray features to TR
Date: 2008 Feb 13
References: J3/08-007


Discussion:

The WG5 direction of 12-feb-2008 is to separate parallel programming
features into a "core" set that remain in Part 1 of the Fortram 2008
standard, and the remaining features into a separate Technical Report
on "Enhanced Parallel Computing Facilities".

The facilities to be moved out of Part 1 of the standard are:

1) Collective intrinsic subroutines:
   CO_ALL
   CO_ANY
   CO_COUNT
   CO_MAXLOC
   CO_MAXVAL
   CO_MINLOC
   CO_MINVAL
   CO_PRODUCT
   CO_SUM

2) Teams and features that require teams:
   Team formation and inquiry; FORM_TEAM, TEAM_IMAGES intrisics,
         and the IMAGE_TEAM type.
   SYNC TEAM statement
   TEAM specifiers in I/O statements

3) The NOTIFY and QUERY statements.

4) File connected on more than one image, except for the files
   preconnected to the units specified by OUTPUT_UNIT and ERROR_UNIT.


Edits to 08-007:

Introduction:

[xv:2+] In bullet 14 of the list of new features, at the end of the
sentence replace "image control statements, and collective
subroutines" with "and image control statements".

Clause 2:

[12:5-8] Delete 2.1.22 collective subroutine.

[12:41-13:1] Delete 2.1.28 connect team.

[24:6-11] Delete 2.1.120 team, and 2.1.121 team synchronization.

[29:22,27,35] In the list of R214 <action-stmt> delete
"or <notify-stmt>",
"or <query-stmt>", and
"or <sync-team-stmt>"

Clause 8:

[203:4] In 8.5.1 Image control statements, paragraph 2, delete bullet
2 (SYNC TEAM statement)

[203:7-8]  delete bullets 5 and 6 (NOTIFY and QUERY
statements)

[203:11-12] delete bullets 9 and 10 (OPEN and CLOSE statements)

[203:15] delete the last bullet (CALL statement for a collective
subroutine or ... FORM_TEAM)

[203:17-18] In 8.5.1 Image control statements, paragraph 3, replace ",
END CRITICAL" with "or END CRITICAL" and delete the remainder of the
sentence ", or CLOSE ... one image".

[204:1-7] In 8.5.1 Image control statements, delete paragraph 7.

[204:7+] In NOTE 8.32, delete the end of the second sentence: "; or
one image be executing a blocking QUERY statement for which an image
in its image set never executes the corresponding NOTIFY statement"

[205-206] Delete 8.5.3 SYNC TEAM statement.

[207:1-]. In 8.5.4 SYNC IMAGES statement, NOTE 8.38, delete first two
sentences,

"Execution of a SYNC TEAM statement causes all the images of the team
to wait for each other.  There might, however, be situations where
this is not efficient."

and delete the last paragraph:

"The SYNC IMAGES syntax ... image to image."

[207-209] Delete 8.5.5 NOTIFY and QUERY statements.

[210:2-4, 210:10-11, 211:2] In 8.5.7 STAT= and ERRMSG= specifiers in
image execution control statements,

replace "SYNC TEAM, SYNC IMAGES, SYNC MEMORY, NOTIFY, or QUERY"

with "SYNC IMAGES or SYNC MEMORY"

three times (in the first sentence of paragraph 1, in the last
sentence of paragraph 1, and in the first sentence of paragraph 2).

Clause 9:

[214:29-215:1] In 9.3.1 Basic concepts of External files, Delete the
4th sentence of paragraph 3: "A named file that is opened with the
TEAM= ... image of the team." In the last sentence of this paragraph,
replace "Apart from this, whether" with "Whether".

[221:16] At the end of paragraph 4 of "9.5.1 Referring to a file" add

  "The intput unit identified by * is preconnected on image 1 and is
  not preconnected on other images.  The output unit identified by *
  is preconnected to the same file on all images, and the unit
  identified by the named constant ERROR_UNIT of the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
  intrinsic module is preconnected to the same file on all images."

Note to Editor: This edit interacts with paper 08-129.

[223:18-19] In 9.5.6.1 General of 9.5.6 OPEN statement, delete the
last sentence of paragraph 4: "If the previous connect team ... team
shall be the same."

[224:21] in 9.5.6.2 Syntax, delete the TEAM= <connect-spec>.

[226:21] In 9.5.6.12 NEWUNIT= specifier in the OPEN statement, in the
first sentence of paragraph 1, delete "that is the same on all images
of the connect team".

[227:33 - 228:13+] Delete 9.5.6.19 "TEAM= specifier in the OPEN
statement", including the Note at the end of the subclause.

[229:3-6] In 9.5.7.1 General of 9.5.7 CLOSE statement, delete
paragraph 6: "If an image ... one image (8.5.3)."

[229:9+] In 9.5.7.1 General of 9.5.7 CLOSE statement, in Note 9.24 at
the end of the subclause, delete the end of the sentence: ",but
without team ... one image".

[250:23] In 9.8.1 Syntax of 9.8 File positioning statements, in the
first sentence of paragraph 1, delete "or whose connect team has more
than one image".

[252:19-21] In 9.9 FLUSH statement, delete the end of the first
sentence and the beginning of the second sentence of paragraph 2:
"causes data written to an external unit ... segment for that unit. It
also".

[254:21] In the list of <inquire-spec> in 9.10.2.1 Syntax of 9.10.2
Inquiry specifiers, delete "or TEAM= <image-team>".

[259:20-22+] Delete 9.10.2.32 "TEAM= specifier in the INQUIRE
statement", including the Note at the end of the subclause.

[260:25-27] In 9.11.2 Error conditiona and the ERR= specifier, delete
the second sentence of paragraph 2: "If an error condition occurs
... all images in the connect team."

[262:4-6] In 9.11.5 IOSTAT= specifier, delete bullet item 3: "the
processor-dependent ... STAT_STOPPED_IMAGE .. termination of
execution."

[262:8] In 9.11.5 IOSTAT= specifier, in bullet item 4, delete "and
STAT_STOPPED_IMAGE".

Clause 13:

[343:4-5] In 13.1 Classes of intrinsic procedures, delete last
sentence in para 1: "Some ... collective subroutines."

[343:15-18] In 13.1 Classes of intrinsic procedures, delete para 4: "A
collective subroutine ... execution of a collective subroutine."

[344:18-25] Delete subclause 13.2.4 Arguments to collective
subroutines.

[347:2] Delete letter "C" and the procedures in table 13.1 with that
Class.

[347] Delete FORM_TEAM and TEAM_IMAGES from table 13.1

[365-370] Delete these subclauses:
   13.7.29 CO_ALL
   13.7.30 CO_ANY
   13.7.31 CO_COUNT
   13.7.33 CO_MAXLOC
   13.7.34 CO_MAXVAL
   13.7.35 CO_MINLOC
   13.7.36 CO_MINVAL
   13.7.37 CO_PRODUCT
   13.7.38 CO_SUM

[381:28-382:24] Delete 13.7.63 FORM_TEAM.

[427:15-25] Delete 13.7.163 TEAM_IMAGES.

[434:8-11+] Delete 13.8.2.8 IMAGE_TEAM, including Note 13.24.

[435:33-436:1] In 13.8.2.20 STAT_STOPPED_IMAGE, delete "or to the STAT
argument of the intrinsic subroutine FORM TEAM (13.7.63)," from the
first sentence in para 1.

Clause 16:

[502:11] In 16.6.7 Variable defintion context, delete list item (11)
"a READY= specifier in a QUERY statement;".

Annex B:

[507:5-508:15] Delete B.1.1 Normal and error termination of execution.

[557:26-558:18] Delete B.11.2 Collective co-array subroutine variations

[521:25] In B.5.1, add "was" before "removed".

[538:21] Missing right parenthesis following \ref (11.2.2

[538:30] Missing right parenthesis following \ref (11.2.2

[542:9]  Missing right parenthesis following \ref (11.2.2

Annex C:

[576:30-31] Replace the current text "whether a named file...TEAM=
specifier" with:

   "whether a named file on one image is the same as a file with the
    same name on another image (9.3);"
