                                                                08-204
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Transparent inter-program data transport via I/O statements
Date: 2008 June 10
References: 08-007r2

1.  Introduction

Transporting a structure from one program to another via MPI or PVM or
some other C-based library is tedious, error prone, and fragile.

Asychronous data transport is problematical, and has been the subject of
substantial correspondence.

Coarrays are not going to help with inter-program data transport;
they're only for intra-program data transport.

2.  Proposal

o  Add a specifier to OPEN, say MORE= or EXTRA=, with a value that is a
   default character scalar expression.  Its use is processor dependent.

o  Add section notes in Annex C urging processors to interpret the
   specifier to facilitate inter-program communication via input/output
   statements.  Most systems already provide this, but the program at
   one end is specialized, e.g. NFS, not something general.

A new specifier is not strictly necessary, since the interpretation of
the FILE= specifier is processor dependent, but on most systems the file
names are quite general so a processor might have trouble noticing
something special.

3.  Edits

[203: 9.5.6.2 R905] ----------------------------------------------------
Editor: Add another RHS in alphabetical order:

"        <<or>> EXTRA = <scalar-default-char-expr>"

[204: 9.5.6.9+] --------------------------------------------------------
Editor: Add a new subclause:

"9.5.6.9a EXTRA= specifier in the OPEN statement

"The interpretation of the <scalar-default-char-expr> in the EXTRA=
specifier is processor dependent.  Interpretations are suggested in
C.6.3.  The relationship between the value of the EXTRA= specifier and
the values of other specifiers, such as ACCESS= or FORM=, is processor
dependent."

[460: after "the encoding ... (9.5.6.9)" ] -----------------------------
Editor: Insert an item:

"o the interpretation of the <scalar-default-char-expr> in the EXTRA=
   specifier in an OPEN statemet (9.5.6.9a);"

[488: C.6.3p14+] -------------------------------------------------------
Editor: Add a paragraph:

"The interpretation of the value of the EXTRA= specifier is processor
dependent.  One suggested use is to indicate that the connection is to
be opened for inter-program data transfer, not data transfer between the
program and a file, and to specify the mechanism of that transfer.  This
is especially useful for transferring structures since they would
usually otherwise need to be treated one ultimate component at a time.
It is useful, but less so, for objects of intrinsic types, since
different routines are not needed for each type, kind and rank.  Another
potential use is to specify a nondefault representation for unformatted
files, say XDR, or with byte orders reversed."
