                                                           09-171
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Interpretation concerning elemental intrinsic pointer targets
         and actual arguments
Date: 2009 March 27
References: 04-007

NUMBER: TBD
TITLE: Elemental intrinsic pointer targets and actual arguments
KEYWORDS: Elemental intrinsic, procedure pointer, dummy procedure
DEFECT TYPE: Error
STATUS: TBD

QUESTION:

The sixth paragraph of subclause 7.4.2.2 [145:7-8] specifies that if a
procedure target is a <procedure-name> that is a specific name and a
generic name, as is the case for many of the intrinsic procedures
listed in subclause 13.6 [298:13ff]and not marked with a bullet (the
ones allowed to be procedure pointer targets), the specific procedure
is used.

Constraint C728 in subclause 7.4.2 [144:7] allows a <proc-target> to be
an elemental intrinsic procedure.

The implication of these two texts is that a nonelemental specific
intrinsic procedure is associated with the procedure pointer as its
target.  This should be specified explicitly.

For each intrinsic function listed in 13.6 and not marked with a
bullet, does there exist a nonelemental specific intrinsic version for
every rank, or only for rank zero?

If the procedure pointer has explicit interface and has a dummy argument
that is not a scalar, can the procedure pointer be pointer associated
with a nonelemental specific intrinsic procedure having an argument of
the same rank?

The same questions, mutatis mutandis, apply to argument association:

Constraint C1228 [267:14] in subclause 12.4 allows an actual argument
to be an elemental intrinsic procedure.  C1229 and the second paragraph
of subclause 12.4.1.3 [271:15-19] (redundantly) require an intrinsic
procedure actual argument to be one listed in 13.6 and not marked with
a bullet.

The last sentence of the second paragraph of subclause 12.4.1.3
specifies that if an actual argument is a procedure name is a specific
name and a generic name, as is the case for many of the intrinsic
procedures listed in subclause 13.6 and not marked with a bullet (the
ones allowed to be procedure pointer targets), the specific procedure
is used.

The implication of these texts is that a nonelemental specific
intrinsic procedure is the actual argument associated with the dummy
argument.

For each intrinsic function listed in 13.6 and not marked with a
bullet, does there exist a nonelemental specific intrinsic version for
every rank, or only for rank zero?

If the procedure pointer has explicit interface and has a dummy argument
that is not a scalar, can the procedure pointer be pointer associated
with a nonelemental specific intrinsic procedure having an argument of
the same rank?

ANSWER (1):

In both cases the specific procedure used is the scalar one.  Edits
are provided to clarify this.

ANSWER (2):

In the case of a procedure pointer, the scalar specific intrinsic
procedure is used if the procedure pointer has explicit interface and
has scalar dummy arguments, or if the procedure pointer has implicit
interface.  If the procedure pointer has explicit interface and has
array dummy arguments, the dummy arguments shall all have the same rank
and the specific intrinsic procedure of the appropriate rank becomes
the target of the procedure pointer.  Otherwise the association is
prohibited.

In the case of a dummy procedure, the scalar specific intrinsic
procedure is used if the procedure has explicit interface, the dummy
procedure has explicit interface and the dummy procedure has scalar
dummy arguments, or if either the procedure or dummy procedure has
implicit interface.  If the procedure has explicit interface, the dummy
procedure has explicit interface, and the dummy procedure has array
dummy arguments, the dummy arguments of the dummy procedure shall all
have the same rank and the specific intrinsic procedure of the
appropriate rank becomes associated with the dummy procedure.
Otherwise the association is prohibited.

Edits are provided to clarify this.

EDITS (1):

Insert the following after Constraint C728 [144:7+] in subclause 7.4.2:

C728a (R742) If <procedure-name> is a specific intrinsic procedure and
      <proc-pointer-object> has explicit interface, all dummy arguments
      of the specified interface shall be scalars."

Insert the following after the final paragraph of subclause 7.4.2.2
[145:8+]:

"If <procedure-name> is an elemental intrinsic procedure the scalar
specific intrinsic procedure becomes pointer associated with
<proc-pointer-object>. If <proc-pointer-object> has implicit interface
it is interpreted to have the same number of dummy arguments as
<procedure-name> and those dummy arguments are interpreted to be
scalars."

Insert the following as a new paragraph after the second paragraph of
subclause 12.4.1.3 [271:19+]:

"If an actual argument is an elemental intrinsic procedure, the scalar
specific intrinsic procedure is associated with the dummy argument.

C1233a (R1221) If the <actual-arg> is a specific intrinsic procedure,
       the referenced procedure has explicit interface, and the dummy
       procedure corresponding to the actual argument has explicit
       interface, all arguments of the dummy procedure shall be
       scalars.

If the actual argument is an elemental intrinsic procedure and the
referenced procedure has implicit interface, the dummy procedure
corresponding to the actual argument shall either have implicit
interface or shall have scalar dummy arguments."

EDITS (2):

Insert the following after Constraint C728 [144:7+] in subclause 7.4.2:

C728a (R742) If <procedure-name> is a specific intrinsic procedure and
      <proc-pointer-object> has explicit interface, all dummy arguments
      of the specified interface shall be have the same rank."

Insert the following after the final paragraph of subclause 7.4.2.2
[145:8+]:

"If <procedure-name> is an elemental intrinsic procedure the specific
nonelemental intrinsic procedure of the appropriate rank is associated
with <proc-pointer-object>.  If <proc-pointer-object> has explicit
interface the specific nonelemental intrinsic procedure having
arguments of the same rank as the dummy arguments of the specified
interface becomes pointer associated with <proc-pointer-object>.  If
<proc-pointer-object> has implicit interface it is interpreted to have
the same number of dummy arguments as <procedure-name> and those dummy
arguments are interpreted to be scalars."

Insert the following as a new paragraph after the second paragraph of
subclause 12.4.1.3 [271:19+]:

"If the actual argument is an elemental intrinsic procedure the
nonelemental specific intrinsic procedure of appropriate rank is
associated with the dummy argument.  If the referenced procedure has
implicit interface, or if it has explicit interface and the dummy
procedure has implicit interface, a scalar version of the specific
intrinsic procedure is used.  If the referenced procedure has implicit
interface and the dummy procedure has explicit interface, it shall have
scalar arguments.

If the referenced procedure has explicit interface and the dummy
procedure has explicit interface, the nonelemental specific intrinsic
procedure having arguments of the same rank as the arguments of the
dummy procedure is associated with the dummy procedure.

C1233a (R1221) If the <actual-arg> is a specific intrinsic procedure,
       the referenced procedure has explicit interface, and the dummy
       procedure corresponding to the actual argument has explicit
       interface, all arguments of the dummy procedure shall have the
       same rank."

SUBMITTED BY: Van Snyder

HISTORY:
