                                                           09-174
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Shape of result of elemental function as defined operation
Date: 2009 March 27
References: 09-007r1

1.  Discussion

12.8.2p1 [316:13-14] says "If a generic name or a specific name is
used to reference an elemental function, the shape of the result is the
same as the shape of the actual argument with greatest rank."

There's nothing subsequent in that paragraph about the case of an
elemental function invoked by way of an operator.

We could almost say "The shape of the result of a reference to an
elemental function is the same as the shape of the actual argument with
greatest rank."

The problem is that we don't call the operands of a defined operation
actual arguments.  12.4.3.4.3p2 [287:1-3] does, however, specify that
the left-hand side and the right-hand side of defined assignment are
actual arguments.  It would be better if we did the same for defined
operations, mutatis mutandis.

The last sentence of 12.5.2.4p13 [296:29-31] treats operands of defined
operations as if they were actual arguments, so we probably need to
specify that operands of defined operations ARE actual arguments.

The first sentence of 12.8.3p1 [317:2] appears not to contribute
anything.

2.  Edits

[286:11-13 12.4.3.4.2p2]------------------------------------------------
Editor: Replace the second sentence of 12.4.3.4.2p2 ("For a unary ...
second dummy argument") by the following:

"A unary defined operation is treated as a reference to the function,
with its operand as the actual argument; a reference to a binary defined
operation is treated as a reference to the function, with its left-hand
operand as its first actual argument and its right-hand operand as its
second actual argument."

[316:13-14 12.8.2p1]----------------------------------------------------
Editor: Replace the first sentence of 12.8.2p1 ("If a generic ... rank")
by the following:

"The shape of the result of a reference to an elemental function is the
same as the shape of the actual argument with greatest rank."

[317:2 12.8.3p1]--------------------------------------------------------
Editor: Delete the first sentence of 12.8.3p1 ("An elemental ...
arguments.").
