                                                             J3/09-245
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Description of entities that are not finalized
Date: 2009 June 30
References: 09-007r2

1.  Introduction

The title of 4.5.6.4 is "Entities that are not finalized."  The entities
listed might or might not be finalizable.  If they are finalizable, it
might be seen to contradict the implication of the first sentence of
4.5.6.2 that all finalizable entities are finalized.

Therefore 4.5.6.4 ought to be part of "When finalization occurs."

The aim of 4.5.6.4 is to ease the potential burden on processors that
might otherwise be expected to track down every finalizable entity in
the program and finalize it when a deallocation failure occurs.

The term "immediately before image termination" is ambiguous.

Therefore there might be a converse burden to prevent finalization if a
processor unwinds its stack before image termination.

Some processors might say this happens before "immediately before
termination," and therefore they are required to finalize these
entities, and some might say it happens "immediately before
termination," and therefore they are prohibited from finalizing them.
Finalizing them should neither be required nor prohibited.

Whether the "entities existing immediately prior to termination" are
finalized ought explicitly to be processor dependent, and the
terminology should not include the ambiguous specification "immediately
before termination."  It ought instead to be posed in terms of
conditions explicitly specified elsewhere in the standard.

2.  Edits w.r.t. 09-007r2

[76:36+ 4.5.6.3p10+]----------------------------------------------------
Editor: Insert a new paragraph:

"Whether entities existing when image termination (2.3.5) occurs are
finalized is processor dependent."

[77:1-3 4.5.6.4]--------------------------------------------------------
Editor: Delete subclause 4.5.6.4.

[461:35+ A2]------------------------------------------------------------
Editor: Insert an item:

"o whether entities existing when image termination (2.3.5) occurs are
   finalized (4.5.6.3);"
