                                                             J3/09-289
To: J3
Subject: Contradictions concerning execution sequence and branching
From: Van Snyder
Date: 2009 September 10
Reference: 09-007r2

[33:17 2.3.5p2]---------------------------------------------------------
The second bullet of the list in 2.3.5p2 claims that control constructs
have "implicit internal branching."  Contradicting that, 8.2.1p1 says
"although ... control constructs can cause transfer of control, they are
not branches."

Editor: Replace "branching" by "transfer of control" in the second
bullet of the list to remove this contradiction.

[33:22-23 2.3.5p3]------------------------------------------------------
The second sentence of 2.3.5p2 says "within its scoping unit".  1.3.115
says the scoping unit of a program unit or subprogram excludes any
scoping units within it.  Therefore 2.3.5p2 prohibits execution to
proceed from the executable constructs of a main program or subprogram,
across a  CONTAINS statement, and into an internal subprogram (because
an internal subprogram is a different scoping unit).  Therefore the
second sentence of 2.3.5p3 isn't needed.  It is further harmful because
it contradicts the provisions of 2.3.5p2 relating to procedure
invocation, since it says, without qualification, "The execution
sequence excludes all such [internal procedure] definitions," which
means internal procedures cannot be executed, notwithstanding that
2.3.5p2 explains how they are executed.

Editor: Delete the second sentence of 2.3.5p3.

The first sentence of 2.3.5p3 just restates R1101, R1227, and R1233,
and it's a bit of a lie anyway, since an internal subprogram is a
subprogram, but it can't contain an internal subprogram.  Without the
need to introduce the second sentence it is out of place in 2.3.5.

Editor: Delete the first sentence of 2.3.5p3 (leaving nothing in
2.3.5p3).
