                                                           09-275r1
To: J3
From: Bill Long
Subject: Specification expressions that are not constant
Date: 2009 August 11
References: 09-007r2

Discussion:

The discussion of lower and upper cobounds in the subclause describing
the codimension attribute omit the case of a coarray declared in a
block construct and incorrectly suggests explicit-coshape coarrays can
be components. BLOCK had also not been integrated into the similar
constraint for explicit-shape arrays. Finally, the wording for when
specification expressions are evaluated differs between the
description of automatic objects and explicit-shape arrays. Fixes are
provided.

------------

Edit to 09-007r2:

[88:37] In paragraph 2 of "5.2.2 Automatic data objects", after
"<entity-decl>" add " for a local variable of a subprogram or BLOCK
construct".

[88:38-39] In paragraph 2 of "5.2.2 Automatic data objects", replace
"the procedure or BLOCK construct" with "a procedure defined by the
subprogram, or on execution of the BLOCK statement,".

[92:23] In the second constraint (C529) in "5.3.6.3 Explicit-coshape
coarray", replace "derived type definition" with "BLOCK construct".

[92:24-26] In the third paragraph in "5.3.6.3 Explicit-coshape
coarray" make these two changes:

Replace the first sentence with:

"If an explicit-coshape coarray is a local variable of a subprogram or
BLOCK construct and has cobounds that are not constant expressions,
the cobounds are determined on entry to a procedure defined by the
subprogram, or on execution of the BLOCK statement, by evaluating the
cobounds' expressions."

At the end of the second sentence, after "procedure" add "or BLOCK
construct".

[94:16] In the first constraint (C531) of "5.3.8.2 Explicit-shape
array", after "definition, " add "BLOCK construct, ".









