                                                            10-153
To: J3
From: Robert Corbett
Subject: Interpretation Request: generic resolution with
				 banned argument combinations
Date: 2010 May 31

All references are to J3/10-007.

QUESTION:

The specifications of some intrinsic functions and subroutines
explicitly ban certain combinations of arguments, even though
those combinations are included in the title and the argument
portion of the specification of the function or subroutine.
Examples include CMPLX and RANDOM_SEED.  Suppose one of those
intrinsic functions or subroutines is referenced with one of
the ban combinations of arguments.  If the process of generic
resolution tries to resolve the reference against the
intrinsic, is it resolve the function or subroutine to the
intrinsic or should it continue trying to resolve the function
or subroutine reference?

For example, given the function reference

      CMPLX(Z, R)

where Z is COMPLEX and R is REAL, should the processor resolve
the generic reference to the intrinsic even if it could be
resolved to a user-defined function with the same signature
later in the process of resolving the reference?

Similarly, given the subroutine call

      CALL RANDOM_SEED(GET=A, PUT=B)

should the processor skip over the intrinsic subroutine to
possibly resolve the generic reference against a user-defined
subroutine with the same signature?

ANSWER:

A program that includes such a reference is not a standard-
conforming program.  Because the Fortran standard does not
specify the behavior of nonstandard programs, a processor is
allowed to resolve the references against user-defined
functions or procedures found later in the process of generic
resolution, but it is not required to do so.

EDITS:

None.
