To: J3                                                     10-189
From: Bill Long
Subject: Remove Fortran descriptors from TR.
Date: 2010 June 15
References: J3/10-165, WG5/N1820

Discussion:

In 10-165 there are remaining references to the Fortran descriptor,
fdesc. The new model for enhanced interoperability with C as noted in
N1820 uses a single descriptor, the C descriptor, and removes the
visibility of a Fortran descriptor to the C user. Edits are provided
to make this change.


Edits to 10-165:

[1:24] In 1.3.3, after "CFI_cdesc_t" add " used by the processor to
describe an object that is assumed-shape, assumed-rank, allocatable,
or a data pointer". {copied from the current definition of Fortran
descriptor}

[1:25-28] Delete 1.3.4 "Fortran descriptor ... data pointer".

[9:2] In the heading to 5.1, replace "Object" with "C".

[9:3-4] Delete the first sentence of para 1 of 5.1: "A Fortran
descriptor ... or a data pointer."

[9:5-6] In the third sentence of 5.1, para 1, delete "that allow for
conversion between Fortran and C descriptors ".

[9:7+] Delete Notes 5.1 and 5.2.

[9:8-10:2] Delete 5.1.1 Fortran descriptors.

[10:3-4] Delete the heading "5.2 C descriptors" {which is now the
heading for 5.1} and the first sentence of 5.2. Append the second
sentence of 5.2 to the end of 5.1.

[10:8-9] In the first sentence of 5.3.1, remove "CFI_update_cdesc,
CFI_update_fdesc, CFI_free_fdesc".

[10:11] In the second sentence of 5.3.1, replace the first two
instances of "Fortran descriptor" with "C descriptor", remove the
comma before "allocate", and delete the end of the sentence: ", and
convert between a C descriptor and a corresponding Fortran
descriptor".

[10:37] Delete the line "void * fdesc ...".

[13:3] Delete 5.3.6.1, the description of CFI_update_cdesc. With no
Fortran descriptor, this is no longer needed.

[13:4-10] Delete 5.3.6.2, the description of the function
CFI_update_fdesc, and 5.3.6.3, the description of the function
CFI_free_fdesc.

[13:13-14] In 5.3.6.4, in the third sentence replace "corresponding
Fortran" with "C"

[13:15] In 5.3.6.4, at the end of the fourth sentence, replace
"descriptors" with "descriptor".

[13:16] replace "desriptor" with "descriptor".

[13:16-17] In 5.3.6.5, in the last sentence, replace "Both the Fortran
and C descriptors are" with "The C descriptor is".

[13:21-24] In 5.3.6.5, in the fourth sentence replace "corresponding
Fortran descriptor shall be for same object and" with "C descriptor".
In the last sentence, replace "Both the Fortran and C descriptors are"
with "The C descriptor is".

[13:34-35] In 5.3.6.7, delete the last sentence "If there is a
corresponding Fortran descriptor ... information."

[14:2-3] Delete the end of the first sentence of 5.3.7 " and that
change later ... by the CFI_update_fdesc function".

[14:5] In 5.3.7 para 1 second sentence, after CFI_allocate, replace ",
" with "or ", and delete ", or CFI_update_cdesc". {Since
CFI_update_cdesc has been deleted}.

[14:5-7] Delete the last sentence of 5.3.7, para1: "If the base address
... the corresponding Fortran descriptor shall not be modified."

[14:13-14] Delete para 3 in 5.3.7 "If a Fortran descriptor ... no
longer needed."

[14:36] In 5.3.8 para 3, sentence 1, replace "Fortran" with "C".

[14:37] In 5.3.8 para 3, sentence 2, replace "Fortran" with "C".
