                                                               J3/10-148

To: J3
Subject: Interpretation concerning intrinsic functions with DIM argument
From: Van Snyder
Date: 2010 April 01

----------------------------------------------------------------------

NUMBER: F08/xxxx
TITLE: Is a disassociated pointer allowed as an actual DIM argument?
KEYWORDS: DIM argument
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum
STATUS: Under consideration

QUESTION:

Several intrinsic functions, such as ANY, have a DIM argument, with the
rank of the result depending upon whether it is present.  There is a
prohibition against the actual argument being an optional dummy
argument, but not against it being a disassociated pointer or
deallocated allocatable.  Is the following program standard conforming,
and if so what does it print?

  program DIM_Arg
    integer, pointer :: Dim => NULL()
    logical :: Mask(2,2) = &
      & reshape( (/ .true., .false, .false, .true. /), (/ 2, 2 /) )
    print *, shape( any(mask,dim) )
  end program DIM_Arg

ANSWER:

The description worked until we allowed a disassociated pointer or
unallocated allocatable variable that is associated with a nonpointer
nonallocatable optional argument to be interpreted not to be present.

It was intended that this program not conform.

It was an oversight that disassociated pointer and unallocated
allocatable actual arguments were not prohibited to correspond to DIM
dummy arguments for these intrinsic functions.

Edits are provided to clarify this, but using a different strategy from
simply prohibiting those kinds of arguments.

EDITS:

[13.2.4p1]
Replace "present" by "it appears".  Delete the third sentence, viz. "The
DIM argument ... optional dummy argument."  Better yet, just delete
13.2.4.

[13.7.10]
Replace the subclause heading by "ALL ( MASK, DIM ) or ALL ( MASK )"

[13.7.10p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.10p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "is absent" by
"does not appear".

[13.7.13]
Replace the subclause heading by "ANY ( MASK, DIM ) or ANY ( MASK )"

[13.7.13p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.13p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "is absent" by
"does not appear".

[13.7.90]
Replace the subclause heading by "LBOUND ( ARRAY, DIM [, KIND ] ) or
LBOUND ( ARRAY [, KIND ] )"

[13.7.90p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.90p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "DIN is present"
by "DIM appears".

[13.7.91]
Replace the subclause heading by "LCOBOUND ( COARRAY, DIM [, KIND ] ) or
LCOBOUND ( COARRAY [, KIND ] )"

[13.7.91p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.91p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "DIM is present"
by "DIM appears".

[13.7.123]
Replace the subclause heading by "NORM2 ( X, DIM ) or NORM2 ( X )"

[13.7.123p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.123p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "is absent" by
"does not appear".

[13.7.128]
Replace the subclause heading by "PARITY ( MASK, DIM ) or PARITY ( MASK )"

[13.7.128p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.128p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "is absent" by
"does not appear".

[13.7.171]
Replace the subclause heading by "UBOUND ( ARRAY, DIM [, KIND ] ) or
UBOUND ( ARRAY [, KIND ] )"

[13.7.171p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.171p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "DIM is present"
by "DIM appears".

[13.7.172]
Replace the subclause heading by "UCOBOUND ( COARRAY, DIM [, KIND ] ) or
UCOBOUND ( COARRAY [, KIND ] )"

[13.7.172p3]
In the description of the DIM argument, delete "(optional)" and the
second sentence, viz. "The corresponding ... optional dummy argument."

[13.7.172p4]
In the description of Result Characteristics, replace "DIM is present"
by "DIM appears".

SUBMITTED BY: Van Snyder

HISTORY:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
