To: J3                                                     10-252r1
From: Bill Long
Subject: Changes between 10-165r2 and 10-251
Date: 2010 October 15
References: 10-165r2


This paper documents the changes made to the Draft Interoperability TR
29113, 10-1652.pdf, to make 10-251.pdf.  References are to 10-165r2.


Changes from passed Meeting 193 Papers:

10-203r2 done.

10-204r3 done.

10-205r4 done.

10-206r1 done.

10-207r2 :

Reformatted the list of errors as a table to match the style of the
other Macro constant lists.

In the opening text at [11:1-] I removed "The macros shall be defined
         to be integer constant expressions suitable for use in #if
         preprocessing directives." since we already say this at the
         beginning of the MACROS section.

The edits for CFI_allocate conflict with 10_206r1, which allow a
non-NULL base address if the object is a pointer. (This is to match
the Fortran ALLOCATE rules.)  Modified the edits to reflect this.

[12:6] Changed "mot" -> "not".

10-215 done (First Edit only).

10-216   done.

10-217r1 done.

10-218r2 :

Changed [17:25+] edit to use :: separator to match the other
declaration in style, and added ,intrinsic" to the iso_c_binding
module use statement.

[18:3] instruction to change "&&" to "!=" appears to be wrong. Used
the edits from 221 instead (&& -> ||).

[18:11,12] Same issue (and reaction) as [18:3].


10-219r1 done.

10-220r2 done.

10-222r1 done.

10-224r2 : Reordered functions to avoid splitting up CFI_allocate and
CFI_deallocate.

10-225r1 : The instructions say "insert new paragraphs and a
note". Not finding a Note, I inserted only the paragraphs.

10-227r1 : Added "An identifier is also provided to indicate that the
       type of the object is unknown. Its value is different from that
       of any other type identifier." to the description of the type
       member of CFI_cdesc_t.

       Replaced 5.2.5 para 5 sentence 2 with : "The values for
       CFI_type_struct and CFI_type_unspecified shall be distinct and
       distinct from all the other type specifiers."

10-229r1 : The second edit at [12:17] is a mistake and was not
entered. It contradicts the edit at [12:14-17], which explicitly
changed CFI_is_contiguous to NOT return an error indicator.

10-232r4 :

1) The last line of the description of dim [ ]:

    "The number of elements in an object of type CFI_cdesc_t shall be
    equal to the rank of the object."

makes no sense. An object of type CFI_cdesc_t has rank zero. Replaced
with:

    "The number of elements in the array shall be equal to the rank of
    the object."

2) Put text for CFI_CDESC_T before CFI_MAX_RANK {alphabetical}

3) Changed 'DESC' to 'CDESC' throughout.

4) Changed "is" to "-" after CFI_CDESC_T to match the form of the
other macro descriptions.

5) Moved Note to after the Note for version.


10-237r2:

[2:2] There is a similar "is" in para 5 if the Introduction. That one
looks OK, as it refers to the "facility" and not the TR itself, but
others might want to check it.

Added Edit: The last sentence of 2.1 para 3 contains a list of
functions following the word "function".  Changed "function ALLOCATED"
to "functions ALLOCATED".

[5:22+5+] : Assume the "22" is really "12". Clear from the "3.3+..."

[7:1] : Made the same change in para 6 of the Introduction.

5.2.3: Added an extra UTI to point out problems with the beginning of
the edit for [10:12+].

Added more text to [TR2] (Now UTI TR3) to elaborate on the issues
involved.



10-249r1 :

[1:29] Added edit: singularize "procedures" after the removed "one of".

[3:6-7] At end of edit text, add a "}". (Latex requirement.)

[3:14-16] Added { } around constraint text. (Latex).

Added "C" in front of explicit constraint numbers where needed.

[3:25-26] After 12.6.2.2 added "of \Fortranstandard{}". (Missing part
of reference.)

Applied the edit for [5:20] at [5:10] instead, since there is no
[5:20] and [5:10] discusses bounds.

[12:39+] As worded this suggests that the Notes in 15.3.7 are all
deleted, as is paragraph 3. I don't think that was intended.  Inserted
"paragraphs one and two" to limit the deletion. Clearly an integration
issue later, but deleting Notes in 10-007 seems like editing unrelated
to the TR.




Additional Changes:


Throughout Clause 5: The \cf font specification for
ISO_Fortran_binding.h and other code symbols in inline text was
repaired so that the whole word is in code font rather than just the
first letter.

[12:6] "desriptor" -> "descriptor" {spelling typo}

Changed the Title to include "TR 29113" for better clarity.
