                                                            J3/11-135
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Explicit interface requirement for proc pointer association
Date: 2011 January 29
Reference: 10-007r1

1. Summary
----------

Concerning procedure pointer assignment, 7.2.2.4p4 says "If the
characteristics of the pointer object or the pointer target are such
that an explicit interface is required, both the pointer object and the
pointer target shall have an explicit interface."

One cannot determine whether the characteristics of a pointer object are
such that it requires explicit interface unless it has explicit
interface.  12.4.2.2p1(3)(c) is the only one that's even close, but it
isn't enough because the non-constant expression for a type parameter
value either would necessarily (a) depend upon dummy arguments of the
procedure, or (b) depend upon variables accessed by host association.
In either case, to determine that, the interface would necessarily have
been explicit.

If the <declaration-type-spec> in the <procedure-declaration-statement>
specifies a derived type, and a <type-param-value> therein is an
expression that is not a constant expression, this just means that the
result type of the target has to have the same value for that type
parameter.  Maybe that parameter of the target's result type has that
value, and it's given by a constant expression.  Who can tell, unless
the target's interface is explicit?  Whether the target would be
required to have explicit interface where it is referenced depends on
its characteristics, not on the pointer object's characteristics.  This
analysis also applies to the case of reference to an external
(non-pointer) procedure declared by a <procedure-declaration-statement>
containing a <declaration-type-spec> with such a <type-param-value>:
It's the procedure, not its local declaration that determines whether it
is required to have explicit interface where it's referenced.

The only requirements we have on explicit interface (12.4.2.2) depend
upon the procedure being referenced.  The appearance of a procedure as a
target in a pointer assignment isn't a reference (at least not according
to 1.3.120.4).  Therefore, the appearance of the name of a procedure
that would require explicit interface where it is referenced, as a
target in a pointer assignment, isn't enough to require it to have
explicit interface.

2. Edits w.r.t. 10-007r1
------------------------

[160:9-10 7.2.4.4p4]----------------------------------------------------
Editor: Replace "If ... required" by "If the characteristics of the
pointer target are such that it would be required to have explicit
interface (12.4.2.2) where it is referenced".  Delete second "an" .
