To: J3                                                       11-232
Subject: PDTS 29113 Ballot comment GB7
From: Bill Long
Date: 2011 September 26
References: WG5/N1869, WG5/N1880 WG5/N1881, 11-231

Discussion:

The 7th comment (labeled here as GB7) in the UK Ballot (N1881)
proposes changing the text in 5.3.5.1, para 4 bullet list to use
Fortran terms (defined/reference) instead of "modified/accessed".  It
is unclear why the phrase "given a value" is not similarly replaced by
"defined". The edits below include that change in addition to the GB7
changes.

In reading 5.3.5.1, paragraphs 2-5 seem out of place.  For example,
paragraph 2 starts "Within a C function..." just below the 5.3.5 title
"Functions", yet the C functions of paragraph 2 are not the ones
referred to by the title.  Subclause 5.3.5.1 is clearer if paragraphs
2-5 are removed, leaving paragraphs 1, 6, and 7, all of which discuss
the actual functions that follow.  The removed paragraphs would make
more sense in a new subclause following 5.3.6.


Edits to N1869:


1) 5.3.5.1, para 4 bullet list - Change "modified" to "defined or
becomes undefined" and "accessed" to "referenced". {This is the
original GB7 edit.}

2) 5.3.5.1, para 4 bullet list - Change "given a value" to "defined".

3) Create a new subclause, 5.3.6a, following 5.3.6 with the title
"Restrictions on described objects", and move 5.3.5.1 paragraphs 2, 3,
4 (as modified by edit {GB6} in 11-231 and the edits above}, and 5 to
this new subclause.

4) In the penultimate paragraph of 6.9 change "5.3.8" to "5.3.9" and
change "15.5.8" to "15.5.9".

