To:        J3                                      12-178r1
From:      Bill Long
Subject:   Coarray collectives
Date: 2012 October 3
Reference: WG5/N1930, 12-170

Discussion:
-----------

This paper proposes syntax, semantics, and edits for feature
3. Collectives in N1930:

A collective subroutine is an intrinsic subroutine that is executed by
a set of images. It performs a computation based on values on the
images of the set. Collective subroutines offer the possibility of
substantially more efficient execution of reduction operations than
would be possible by non-expert programmers. Corresponding routines
are widely used in MPI programs.

C1: A call to a collective subroutine is not an image control
    statement. However, such a call shall appear only in a context
    that allows an image control statement.  Even though calls to
    collective subroutines involve internal synchronization required
    by the usual rules for reference and definition of subroutine
    arguments, they do not facilitate ordering of segments.
    
C2: If a collective subroutine is invoked on one image, it shall be
    invoked by the same statement on all images of the current team.

C3: A collective subroutine based on a user-written procedure that
    applies the required operation to local variables shall be
    provided. In addition, because they are often needed, there should
    be specific collective subroutines for SUM, MAX, and MIN for
    intrinsic types for which the corresponding operations are
    defined.  Forms that provide the result to just one image or to
    all the images involved should be provided. Beyond this, there
    should be a collective subroutine that broadcasts a value on one
    image to a set of images. Coindexed source and result arguments
    are not permitted.

The syntax, semantics, and edits assume the Teams proposal in N1930.


Syntax and Semantics
--------------------

A collective subroutine is one that is invoked on each image of the
current team to perform a calculation on those images and which
assigns the value of the result on all of them or one of them. If it
is invoked by one image, it shall be invoked by the same statement on
all images of the current team. A call to a collective subroutine
shall appear only in a context that allows an image control statement.

Each actual argument to a collective subroutine shall have the same
bounds, cobounds, and type parameters as the corresponding actual
argument on any other image of the current team. The SOURCE and RESULT
arguments shall not be coindexed.

On any two images calling a collective subroutine, the ultimate
arguments for a coarray dummy argument that is an actual argument to
the collective subroutine shall be corresponding coarrays as described
in 2.4.7 of ISO/IEC 1539-1:2010.

Five collective subroutines are provided:

CO_BROADCAST (SOURCE, SOURCE_IMAGE)  - a collective broadcast

CO_MAX (SOURCE [,RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE)   - maximum value

CO_MIN (SOURCE [,RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE)   - minimum value

CO_REDUCE (SOURCE, OPERATION [,RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE) - 
       reduction by a user-specified function

CO_SUM (SOURCE [,RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE)   - SUM reduction

 
CO_BROADCAST copies the value of SOURCE on image SOURCE_IMAGE to the
corresponding SOURCE in the calls on all of the other images in the
current team.

The SOURCE and RESULT arguments may be scalars or arrays. If the
SOURCE argument is an array, the reduction or broadcast is done
separately for each element of the array, broadside across the current
team of images.

The SOURCE and RESULT arguments of CO_MAX, CO_MIN, CO_REDUCE, or
CO_SUM may be coarrays, but that is not required.

If the RESULT argument is present the result of the computation is
assigned to RESULT; otherwise the result of the computation is
assigned to SOURCE. If the RESULT_IMAGE argument is present the result
of the computation is assigned only on image number RESULT_IMAGE;
otherwise the result is assigned on all images of the current team.


Edits to J3/12-170:
--------------------

[5:5-6] In 3.1 replace the placeholder text with
"collective subroutine
intrinsic subroutine that is invoked on the current team of images
to perform a calculation on those images and assign the value of the
result on one of all of them (7.2)"

[13:3-5] In 7.1 replace the first two sentences with "Detailed
specifications of the generic intrinsic subroutines ATOMIC_ADD,
ATOMIC_AND, ATOMIC_CAS, ATOMIC_OR, ATOMIC XOR, CO_BROADCAST, CO_MAX,
CO_MIN, CO_REDUCE, and CO_SUM are provided in 7.3."

[13:10] In 7.2 replace the placeholder text with
"A collective subroutine is one that is invoked on each image of the
current team to perform a calculation on those images and which
assigns the value of the result on all of them or one of them. If it
is invoked by one image, it shall be invoked by the same statement on
all images of the current team. A call to a collective subroutine
shall appear only in a context that allows an image control statement.

Each actual argument to a collective subroutine shall have the same
bounds, cobounds, and type parameters as the corresponding actual
argument on any other image of the current team. The SOURCE and RESULT
arguments shall not be coindexed.

On any two images calling a collective subroutine, the ultimate
arguments for a coarray dummy argument that is an actual argument to
the collective subroutine shall be corresponding coarrays as described
in 2.4.7 of ISO/IEC 1539-1:2010."

[15:8+] At the end of 7.3 add new subclauses:

"7.3.6  CO_BROADCAST (SOURCE, SOURCE_IMAGE)

Description. Broadcast of a value to all images of the current team.

Class. Collective subroutine.

Arguments.

SOURCE shall be a coarray. It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument. SOURCE
becomes defined on all images of the current team with the value of
SOURCE on image SOURCE_IMAGE.

SOURCE_IMAGE shall be type integer. It is an INTENT(IN) argument. Its
value shall be the image index of one of the images in the current team.

Example. If SOURCE is the array [1, 5, 3] on image one, after
execution of CALL CO_BCAST(SOURCE,1) the value of SOURCE on all images
of the current team is [1, 5, 3].


7.3.7 CO_MAX (SOURCE [, RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE])

Description. Maximum value of elements on the current team of images.

Class. Collective subroutine.

Arguments.

SOURCE shall be of type integer, real, or character. It is an
INTENT(INOUT) argument. If it is a scalar, the computation result is
equal to the maximum value of SOURCE on all images of the current
team. If it is an array, the value of the computation result is equal
to the maximum value of all the corresponding elements of SOURCE on
the images of the current team. If RESULT is not present, value of the
computation result is assigned to SOURCE. If REULT is present, SOURCE
is not modified.

RESULT (optional) shall be of the same type, type parameters, and
shape as SOURCE. It is an INTENT(OUT) argument. If RESULT is present,
the value of the computation result is assigned to RESULT.

RESULT_IMAGE (optional) shall be type integer. It is an INTENT(IN)
argument. Its value shall be the image number of one of the images in
the current team. If RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is present,
the result of the computation is assigned to RESULT on image
RESULT_IMAGE and RESULT on all other images becomes undefined. If
RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is not present, the result of the
computation is assigned to SOURCE on image RESULT_IMAGE and SOURCE on
all other images becomes undefined.

Example. If the number of images in the current team is two and SOURCE
is the array [1, 5, 3] on one image and [4, 1, 6] on the other image,
the value of RESULT after executing the statement CALL CO_MAX(SOURCE,
RESULT) is [4, 5, 6] on both images.


7.3.8 CO_MIN (SOURCE [, RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE])

Description. Minimum value of elements on the current team of images.

Class. Collective subroutine.

Arguments.

SOURCE shall be of type integer, real, or character. It is an
INTENT(INOUT) argument. If it is a scalar, the computation result is
equal to the minimum value of SOURCE on all images of the current
team. If it is an array, the value of the computation result is equal
to the minimum value of all the corresponding elements of SOURCE on
the images of the current team. If RESULT is not present, value of the
computation result is assigned to SOURCE. If REULT is present, SOURCE
is not modified.

RESULT (optional) shall be of the same type, type parameters, and
shape as SOURCE. It is an INTENT(OUT) argument. If RESULT is present,
the value of the computation result is assigned to RESULT.

RESULT_IMAGE (optional) shall be type integer. It is an INTENT(IN)
argument. Its value shall be the image number of one of the images in
the current team. If RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is present,
the result of the computation is assigned to RESULT on image
RESULT_IMAGE and RESULT on all other images becomes undefined. If
RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is not present, the result of the
computation is assigned to SOURCE on image RESULT_IMAGE and SOURCE on
all other images becomes undefined.

Example. If the number of images in the current team is two and SOURCE
is the array [1, 5, 3] on one image and [4, 1, 6] on the other image,
the value of RESULT after executing the statement CALL CO_MIN(SOURCE,
RESULT) is [1, 1, 3] on both images.


7.3.9 CO_REDUCE (SOURCE, OPERATION [, RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE])

Description. General reduction of elements on the current team of
images.

Class. Collective subroutine.

Arguments.

SOURCE is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.  If it is a scalar, the
computation result is the value that would be obtained by applying the
function specified by the OPERATION argument to the results of
applying the collective subroutine on a processor-dependent set of
images that is part of the current team and another subset of images
that is the rest of the current team. If it is an array, the
computation result is equal to a processor-dependent and
image-dependent application of the collective subroutine on all the
corresponding elements of SOURCE on the images of the current team. If
RESULT is not present, the value of the computation result is assigned
to SOURCE. If RESULT is present, SOURCE is not modified.

OPERATION shall be a pure function that defines the binary,
commutative operation to be performed. The function shall
have two arguments of the same type, type parameters, and rank as
SOURCE. If they are arrays, they shall be of assumed shape. The result
shall have the same type and type parameters as SOURCE and the same
shape as the first argument. If the arguments are arrays, the result
of applying the function to corresponding sections of two arrays shall
be the same as the corresponding section of the result of applying the
function to the wholes of the two arrays. 

RESULT (optional) shall be of the same type, type parameters, and
shape as SOURCE. It is an INTENT(OUT) argument. If RESULT is present,
the value of the computation result is assigned to RESULT.

RESULT_IMAGE (optional) shall be type integer. It is an INTENT(IN)
argument. Its value shall be the image number of one of the images in
the current team. If RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is present,
the result of the computation is assigned to RESULT on image
RESULT_IMAGE and RESULT on all other images becomes undefined. If
RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is not present, the result of the
computation is assigned to SOURCE on image RESULT_IMAGE and SOURCE on
all other images becomes undefined.

Example. If the number of images in the current team is two and SOURCE
is the array [1, 5, 3] on one image and [4, 1, 6] on the other image,
and MyADD is a function that returns the sum of its two integer
arguments, the value of RESULT after executing the statement CALL
CO_REDUCE(SOURCE, MyADD, RESULT) is [5, 6, 9] on both images.


7.3.10 CO_SUM (SOURCE [, RESULT, RESULT_IMAGE])

Description. Sum elements on the current team of images.

Class. Collective subroutine.

Arguments.

SOURCE shall be of numeric type. It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.  If
it is a scalar, the computation result is equal to a
processor-dependent and image-dependent approximation to the sum of
the value of SOURCE on all images of the current team. If it is an
array, the value of the computation result is equal to a
processor-dependent and image-dependent approximation to the sum of
all the corresponding elements of SOURCE on the images of the current
team. If RESULT is not present, value of the computation the result is
assigned to SOURCE. If RESULT is present, SOURCE is not modified.

RESULT (optional) shall be of the same type, type parameters, and
shape as SOURCE. It is an INTENT(OUT) argument. If RESULT is present,
the value of the computation result is assigned to RESULT.

RESULT_IMAGE (optional) shall be type integer. It is an INTENT(IN)
argument. Its value shall be the image number of one of the images in
the current team. If RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is present,
the result of the computation is assigned to RESULT on image
RESULT_IMAGE and RESULT on all other images becomes undefined. If
RESULT_IMAGE is present and RESULT is not present, the result of the
computation is assigned to SOURCE on image RESULT_IMAGE and SOURCE on
all other images becomes undefined.

Example. If the number of images in the current team is two and SOURCE
is the array [1, 5, 3] on one image and [4, 1, 6] on the other image,
the value of RESULT after executing the statement CALL CO_SUM(SOURCE,
RESULT) is [5, 6, 9] on both images."


[17:10+] In 8.3 add a new edit to clause 13

"{Move the three paragraphs of subclause 7.2 in this Technical
Specification to follow paragraph 3 and Note 13.1 in Subclause 13.1 of
ISO/IEC 1539-1:2010.}


[17:10++] In 8.3 add a new edit to clause 13

"{In 13.5 Standard generic intrinsic procedures, para 2} 

After the line "A indicates ... atomic subroutine" insert a new line:

C indicates that the procedure is a collective subroutine"


[17:17+] In 8.3 add these entries at the end of the list of 
modifications to Table 13.1 in 13.5 of the base standard}

"CO_BROADCAST (SOURCE, SOURCE_IMAGE) C Broadcast of a value to 
                                       all images.


 CO_MAX    (SOURCE [, RESULT,      C   Maximum value of elements
                  RESULT_IMAGE])       on all images.

 CO_MIN    (SOURCE [, RESULT,      C   Minimum value of elements
            RESULT_IMAGE])             on all images.

 CO_REDUCE (SOURCE, OPERATION      C   General reduction of elements
            [, RESULT,                 on all images.
            RESULT_IMAGE])

 CO_SUM    (SOURCE [, RESULT,      C   Sum elements on all
            RESULT_IMAGE])             images."


[17:18] In 8.3, second set of edit instructions, replace "7.3.5" with
"7.3.10".



