                                                             J3/13-212

To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Resolve generic without invoking
Date: 2013 December 19
Reference: 04-273, 12-195; 2004 hate-dislike-like-love score 0-1-13-0

Title: Resolve generic without invoking

Submitted by: Van Snyder

Status: For consideration

Basic functionality: Resolve a generic name to a specific procedure
without evaluating expressions or invoking the specific procedure.

Rationale: With care and diligence, one can develop a program so that
related sets of variables, constants and function results are
parameterized by kind type parameters.  In order to change the kind of
that set of entities, one need only change the values of named constants
-- almost:  Generic procedures cannot be actual arguments or procedure
pointer targets.  Thus, any specific procedures that are actual
arguments need to be public, and if one needs to change the program, in
addition to changing named constant definitions, one needs to find all
places where a specific procedure that operates on the entities in
question is an actual argument or procedure pointer target, and manually
edit those appearances.

Estimated impact: Minor

Markham M6 conformance: Remove simple deficiency and discrepancy.

Detailed specification: Define a new syntactic device, for example
<procedure-designator> [ <actual-arg-spec-list> ] that can appear only
as an actual argument or the <proc-target> in a
<pointer-assignment-stmt>.  Specify that it causes the
<procedure-designator> to be resolved to a specific procedure without
evaluating any expressions or invoking any procedures in the
<actual-arg-spec-list>.

Draft edits: To estimate scope of project

Insert an alternative for <proc-target>

R740 <proc-target> <<is>> <expr>
                   <<or>> <generic-resolver>
                   <<or>> ...

Insert a definition of <generic-resolver>

R740a <generic-resolver> <<is>> <procedure-designator> lbracket
                                <actual-arg-spec-list> rbracket

{ Alternatives to enclosing the <actual-arg-spec-list> in brackets are,
  for example, enclosing it in << and >> or { and } or (% and %) or
  ....}

C730a (R740a) <procedure-designator> shall designate a generic procedure
      or a generic binding.  If it designates a generic binding,
      <data-ref> shall not be polymorphic.

Insert an alternative for <actual-arg>

R1223 <actual-arg> <<is>> <expr>
                   <<or>> <generic-resolver>

Insert a subclause

<<12.5.7 Resolving generic pointer targets and actual arguments>>

If a <generic-resolver> is an <actual-arg> or a <proc-target> in a
<pointer-assignment-stmt>, the <procedure-designator> is resolved to a
specific procedure using the types, kinds, and ranks of the
<actual-arg-spec-list> as if they were arguments in a reference to a
procedure with that designator, as specified in 12.5.5.2.  Expressions
in the <actual-arg-spec-list> shall not be evaluated, and procedures in
the <actual-arg-spec-list> shall not be invoked.
