To:      J3                                           J3/13-344r1
From:    Bill Long, John Reid
Subject: Comments on atomics
Date: 2013 October 14
References: N1983, N1989



Discussion - Responses with edits
---------------------------------

{Bill I7}: At [15:15-16] In the case of an optional OLD argument to an
atomic subroutine, the code generated is different depending on
whether OLD is present or not. This is a side effect of economizing on
subroutine names by using the same name for two operations. If the
user writes an OLD argument into the call, it will almost always be
the case that it will be referenced soon after the call. We need to
say that an optional OLD argument that appears shall be present.
Allowing the not-present actual corresponding to an optional argument
is of very little value in this case and allowing it incurs both a
readability and performance penalty. Edits are provided.

{Steve 2}: In ATOMIC_ADD change "ATOM becomes defined with the value
of ATOM+VALUE" to "ATOM becomes defined with the value of ATOM +
INT(VALUE,ATOMIC_INT_KIND)".  The change makes the style more like the
descriptions of the other atomics. And it avoids the problem of VALUE
being too large magnitude to be represented by an integer of KIND
ATOMIC_INT_KND, which would be problematic to implement. Edit included
below.

{Nick 23}: The atomic subroutines must specify that their ATOM
argument is a coarray, in the same way as ATOMIC_DEFINE and
ATOMIC_REF.  Edits are provided for each new Atomic subroutine.

{Van 18, 19, 19a, 20, 21}: In the description of the OLD arguments to
atomics, "scalar of the same type as ATOM" -> "scalar and of type
integer with the same kind as ATOM".  Edits are provided for each
affected atomic subroutine.

{Van 22}: At [16:18] Delete "to have its".

Misc additional minor edits are also included.


Discussion - Responses without edits
------------------------------------

{Van 17}: At [15:11-13] First two sentences are redundant.  Delete the
first one.
Response: These sentences were directly copied from F2008/10-007r1 at
[315:12-14] and should not be edited here.

{Reinhold C}: Request to specify a memory model for atomic functions
(beyond the current model). Possible side effects for EVENT
statements.
Response: Defer to {Nick 22}.

{Malcolm Reason 2}: An explicit memory model for atomics [beyond what
is currently in F2008] is needed for both users and vendors.
Response: Defer to {Nick 22}.

{Nick 22}: 7.2 p15:13-15.  This specification will cause massive
confusion, and it was clear from WG5 in Delft that there was no
agreement on even the minimal semantics specified by Fortran.  In
particular, several people were assuming levels of consistency that
are not always available in existing hardware, and would need extra
work in the compiler to provide.  At the very least, there needs to be
a Note saying clearly and explicitly that currently their behavior is
deliberately left entirely processor-dependent, and WG5 intends to
provide a proper semantic specification in due course.
Response. Users of existing implementations have been using remote
atomic memory operations as part of the SHMEM library, UPC, and
Fortran with coarrays for over a decade on several hardware
architectures without having been confused. In the worst case, atomic
operations can always be implemented using a global lock that is
acquired each time an operation is done.  Obviously you would not want
that implementation for performance reasons, but it is an option for
systems that do remote communication by email or some other very slow
mechanism. But we do not want the semantics implied by that
implementation for all implementations.

{Dan 7}: For atomic_and,or,xor, why not type logical?
Response: Typically atomic hardware supports bitwise operations for
these cases.  Whether that will work for LOGICAL depends on the
internal representation of LOGICAL values. It might work, but
effectively imposes a limitation on the implementation.

{Van 23}: At [16:35] It's hard to justify "swap" in the description of
a subroutine in which only one argument has INTENT(INOUT).  Swap what
with what?
Response: The term "compare and swap" is common in the computer
science lexicon. Using another description would be needlessly
confusing. The second object involved in the swap is split into two
parts, NEW on the way in and OLD on the way out.  This allows NEW to
be a constant, which is a common usage case. Note that the "and swap"
part is conditional depending on the outcome of the compare.


Edits to N1983
--------------

!!![15:17] {Bill I7} Add a new sentence: "An optional OLD argument of an
!!!atomic subroutine shall not be an optional dummy argument."

[16:7] {Bill I7} Change "ATOMIC_ADD (ATOM, VALUE [,OLD])" to
"ATOMIC_ADD (ATOM, VALUE) or ATOMIC_ADD (ATOM, VALUE, OLD)".

[16:11] {Nick 23} Change "scalar" to "a scalar coarray or coindexed
object".

[16:13] {Steve 2} In ATOMIC_ADD change "ATOM becomes defined with the
value of ATOM+VALUE" to "ATOM becomes defined with the value of ATOM +
INT(VALUE,ATOMIC_INT_KIND)".

[16:15] {Van 18} Change "scalar of the same type as ATOM" to "scalar
and of type integer with the same kind as ATOM"

[16:15] {Bill I7} Delete "(optional)"

[16:15-16] {Bill I7} Change "If it is present, it is" to "It is".

[16:18] {Van 22}  Delete "to have its".

[16:21] {Bill I7} Change "ATOMIC_AND (ATOM, VALUE [,OLD])" to
"ATOMIC_AND (ATOM, VALUE) or ATOMIC_AND (ATOM, VALUE, OLD)".

[16:25] {Nick 23} Change "scalar" to "a scalar coarray or coindexed
object".

[16:25] {Van m38} Change "a" to "the". {Consistency with [16:12].}

[16:29] {Van 19} Change "scalar of the same type as ATOM" to "scalar
and of type integer with the same kind as ATOM"

[16:29] {Bill I7} Delete "(optional)"

[16:29-30] {Bill I7} Change "If it is present, it is" to "It is".

[16:32-33] {Van m39} Change "Iold" to "IOLD" twice.

[17:1] {Nick 23} Change "scalar" to "a scalar coarray or coindexed
object".

[17:5] {Nick m40} After "NEW if it" insert "is".

[17:6] {Nick m41} At the end of the description of ATOM add a new
sentence: "If the value of ATOM is not equal to the value of COMPARE,
the value of ATOM is not changed."

[17:7] {Van 19a} Change "scalar of the same type as ATOM" to "scalar
and of type integer with the same kind as ATOM"

[17:13] {Bill I7} Change "ATOMIC_OR (ATOM, VALUE [,OLD])" to
"ATOMIC_OR (ATOM, VALUE) or ATOMIC_OR (ATOM, VALUE, OLD)".

[17:17] {Nick 23} Change "scalar" to "a scalar coarray or coindexed
object".

[17:17] {Van m43} Change "a" to "the". {Consistency with [16:12].}

[17:21] {Van 20} Change "scalar of the same type as ATOM" to "scalar
and of type integer with the same kind as ATOM"

[17:21] {Bill I7} Delete "(optional)"

[17:21-22] {Bill I7} Change "If it is present, it is" to "It is".

[17:23-24] {Van m44} Change "Iold" to "IOLD" twice.

[17:26] {Bill I7} Change "ATOMIC_XOR (ATOM, VALUE [,OLD])" to
"ATOMIC_XOR (ATOM, VALUE) or ATOMIC_XOR (ATOM, VALUE, OLD)".

[17:30] {Nick 23} Change "scalar" to "a scalar coarray or coindexed
object".

[17:30] {Van m45} Change "a" to "the". {Consistency with [16:12].}

[17:34] {Van 21} Change "scalar of the same type as ATOM" to "scalar
and of type integer with the same kind as ATOM"

[17:34] {Bill I7} Delete "(optional)"

[17:34-35] {Bill I7} Change "If it is present, it is" to "It is".

[17:36-37]] {Van m46} Change "Iold" to "IOLD" twice.

[29:40-41] and [30:2-3]  Change four times

"(ATOM, VALUE [,OLD])"

to

"(ATOM, VALUE) or
 (ATOM, VALUE, OLD)"
