                                                          J3/14-135
To: J3
Subject: Poor exposition for OPEN statement modifying current connection
From: Van Snyder
Date: 2014 March 12
Referemce: 14-123r2

1. Introduction
===============

Subclause 9.5.6.1p6 says

  "If the file to be connected to the unit is the same as the file to
  which the file is connected, only the changeable modes (9.5.2) may
  have values different from those of the existing connection."

It's not clear what a "value of the existing connection" is.  That
paragraph continues to give explicit specification for the POSITION= and
STATUS= specifiers, so either they don't specify "values for the
connection" or there's a contradiction.

At the end, it says

  "The ERR=, IOSTAT=, and IOMSG= specifiers from an OPEN statement have
  no effect on any subsequent OPEN statement."

This appears nowhere else.  One might interpret it as yet another
exception to the first sentence, or to mean that if these specifiers do
not appear the ones from the OPEN statement that established the
connection, or from an earlier OPEN statement that modified the
connection, are not used.  If the latter, in light of the words "during
execution of an input/output statement that contains neither the ERR=
nor IOSTAT= specifiers" in 9.11.2p2, it does not appear to be necessary.
The exposition in 9.11.6 could be improved to make this clear in the
IOMSG= case.

It would be better simply to list the specifiers that are not allowed to
specify different values from the ones specified when the current
connection was initially established.

Paper 14-123r2 urged the editor to insert a UTI, but the editor does not
agree that it is a technical issue.

2. Edits
========

[14-007:208:26-33 9.6.5.1p6]  Replace the paragraph:

  "If the file to be connected to the unit is the same as the file to
  which the file is connected, a new connection is not established, but
  specifiers for changeable modes (9.5.2) may specify values different
  from values current for the connection.  This causes new values for
  the specified modes to be in effect, but does not change any value for
  any modes for which such specifiers do not appear.  The position of
  the file is not changed; if the POSITION= specifier appears, the value
  specified shall not disagree with the current position of the file.
  If the STATUS= specifier appears, it shall be specified with the value
  OLD.  If any of the specifiers ACCESS=, ACTION=, ASYNCHRONOUS=,
  ENCODING=, FORM=, or RECL= appear, they shall specify the same values
  as for the OPEN statement that established the current connection, or
  default values if they did not appear in the OPEN statement that
  established the current connection."

It does not appear to be necessary to include "The NEWUNIT= specifier
shall not appear," because that would result in a new connection, with
the same file being connected to two units; this is prohibited by
9.5.4p4.

[14-007:244:26 9.11.6p1] After "statement" insert "in which an IOMSG=
specifier appears" (or "containing the IOMSG= specifier" for consistency
with [14-007:244:13 9.11.5p1]) to make it clear that one in a different
statement, in particular a prior OPEN statement for the same
connection, does not apply.
