                                                           J3/14-139r3
To:      J3
Subject: Variable definition context and Pointer association context
From:    Van Snyder
Date: 2014 June 25

1. Introduction
===============

Everywhere the term "variable definition context" is used, except in
subclause 12.7 "Pure procedures," and subclause C.4.4 "Pointers in
variable-definition contexts," it applies only to nonpointer variables.

Items (2) and (3) in the list of variable definition contexts in
16.6.7p1 "Variable definition context" are actually pointer association
contexts; they are the first and second items in 16.6.8p1 "Pointer
association context".

Item (12) in 16.6.7p1 does not constitute a variable definition context
if both the actual and dummy arguments are pointers.  The fourth item in
16.6.8p1 "Pointer association context" covers the case when they're both
pointers.

The fourth item in 16.6.8p1 "Pointer association context" is defective
in using "associated" where it ought to use "corresponding".

C.4.4p1 at [488:24] is incorrect, at least until the changes here to
16.6.7 are done, and maybe even then.

2. Edits to 14-007r1
====================

[314:32+ C1296(1)+] Insert a list item

  "(1a) in a pointer association context (16.6.8),"

{This recovers items (2), (3) and (12) from 16.6.7p1, which are deleted
below.}

[315:1-2 C1296(6)] Delete "with INTENT(OUT) or INTENT(INOUT)" from item
(6) because it is covered by 16.6.7p1(12).

[477:38-478:1 16.6.7p1(2-3)] Delete the list items because they're not
variable definition contexts, and don't apply to nonpointer variables.

[478:12 16.6.7p1(12)] Append ", unless both the dummy argument and the
actual argument are pointers" at the end of the item, because an actual
argument pointer corresponding to a dummy argument pointer is not a
variable definition context, and doesn't apply to nonpointer variables.

[478:26-27 16.6.8p1, fourth list item] Replace "associated" with
"corresponding".

[502:22,24] Delete the hyphens because "variable-definition" does not
appear anywhere else (maybe it ought to be "variable-definition context"
everywhere, but that would be a bigger edit).
