                                                          J3/14-139r1
To:      J3
Subject: Variable definition context and Pointer association context
From:    Van Snyder
Date: 2014 May 29

1. Introduction
===============

Everywhere the term "variable definition context" is used, except in
subclause 12.7 "Pure procedures," and subclause C.4.4 "Pointers in
variable-definition contexts," it applies only to nonpointer variables.

Items (2) and (3) in the list of variable definition contexts in
16.6.7p1 "Variable definition context" are actually pointer association
contexts; they are the first and second items in 16.6.8p1 "Pointer
association context".

Item (12) in 16.6.7p1 does not constitute a variable definition context
if both the actual and dummy arguments are pointers.  The fourth item in
16.6.8p1 "Pointer association context" covers the case when they're both
pointers.

The fourth item in 16.6.8p1 "Pointer association context" is defective
in not mentioning explicit interface, and using "associated" where it
ought to use "corresponding".  As a consequence, C545 and C558 cannot
actually constrain.

C.4.4p1 at [488:24] is incorrect, at least until the changes here to
16.6.7 are done, and maybe even then.

2. Edits to 14-007
==================

[314:32+ C1296(1)+] Insert a list item

  "(1a) in a pointer association context (16.6.8),"

{This recovers items (2), (3) and (12) from 16.6.7p1, which are deleted
below.}

[314:38 C1296(5)] Replace ", or" with "."

[315:1-2 C1296(6)] Delete item (6) because it is covered by
16.6.7p1(12) and the fourth list item in 16.6.8p1.  The only case not
covered thereby is if the actual argument is not a pointer and the dummy
argument is.  The referenced procedure is required to be pure.  It
therefore cannot use its pointer dummy argument to do anything impure to
the actual argument, even though the dummy argument is a pointer.

[477:38-478:1 16.6.7p1(2-3)] Delete the list items because they're not
variable definition contexts, and don't apply to nonpointer variables.

[478:12 16.6.7p1(12)] Append ", unless both the dummy argument and the
actual argument are pointers" at the end of the item, because an actual
argument pointer corresponding to a dummy argument pointer is not a
variable definition context, and doesn't apply to nonpointer variables.

[478:26-27 16.6.8p1, fourth list item] Insert "with explicit interface"
after "procedure" and replace "associated" with "corresponding".  It is
necessary for the interface to be explicit because the only places where
"pointer association context" is used are in C545 and C558 (and now
C1296), which cannot actually constrain if the interface is not explicit.

[502:22,24] Delete the hyphens because "variable-definition" does not
appear anywhere else (maybe it ought to be "variable-definition context"
everywhere, but that would be a bigger edit).
