                                                           J3/14-254r1
To: J3
From: John Reid & Tom Clune
Subject: NUM_IMAGES: remove FAILED argument
Date: 2014 October 15

Discussion
----------

In his ballot, Reinhold Bader says that we no longer need to return
the number of failed images from NUM_IMAGES now that we have the
intrinsic FAILED_IMAGES. Edits are proposed in alternative 1.
Alternative 2 presents an alternative that allows user to select among
FAILED, STOPPED, STALLED, ACTIVE and ALL for determining the return value.

Edits to N2027:
---------------



Alternative 1:
--------------

[29:13-14] Delete "the optional argument FAILED".

[29:20-22] Delete paragraph.

[37:3+] In the entry for NUM_IMAGES, delete "[FAILED]" thrice.

[39:1-2] Delete "[FAILED]" thrice.

[39:9-10] Delete paragraph for FAILED.

[39:14-16] Delete paragraph for FAILED.



Alternative 2:
--------------

[29:14] Replace "FAILED" with "STATE".

[29:20-22] Replace paragraph with:

"The STATE argument shall be a scalar of type default CHARACTER.  If
STATE is not present, the result is the number of images in the team
specified.  If STATE is present, the result is the number of images in
the team specified that have the corresponding execution status.
Allowed values for STATE are FAILED, STOPPED, STALLED, ACTIVE, and
ALL."

[37:3+] In the entry for NUM_IMAGES, replace "[FAILED]" with "[STATE]"
thrice.

[39:1-2] Replace "[FAILED]" with "[STATE]" thrice.

[39:9-10] Replace paragraph for FAILED with:

"STATE (optional) shall be a scalar of type default CHARACTER.  Its
value specifies that the result is the number of images in the team
specified that have the specified execution state. The value specified
is without case. It is an INTENT(IN) argument."

[39:14-16] Replace paragraph for FAILED with:

"If STATE is not present, the result is the number of images in the
team specified. If STATE is present it shall have one of the values
FAILED, STOPPED, STALLED, ACTIVE, or ALL.  If STATE has the value
FAILED the result is the number of failed images in the team
specified.  If STATE has the value STOPPED the result is the number of
images that have initiated termination in the team specified.  If
STATE has the value STALLED the result is the number of stalled images
in the team specified.  If STATE has the value ACTIVE the result is
the number of active images in the team specified.  If STATE has the
value ALL the result is the number of images in the team specified."
