                                                             J3/15-110r4
To:        J3
Subject:   Editorial
From:      Van Snyder
Date: 2015 February 23
Reference: 15-007

1. General
----------

[24:24-25 1.5p4] Replace "given the EXTERNAL attribute (5.3.9) in its
scope (2.2.1)" with "has the EXTERNAL attribute (5.3.9) where it is
used".

{What does "its scope" mean?  The scope of the reference, the scope of
declaration of the name, or the scope of definition of the subprogram?
What if the name is accessed by use or host association, and the name is
given the EXTERNAL attribute in the place from which it is accessed?
What if the name is given the EXTERNAL attribute in some scoping unit
from which it is NOT accessed at the point of reference?}

[305:8 12.5.2.12p1] Replace the full stop with a semicolon.

[305:9 12.5.2.12p1] Replace "Otherwise" with "otherwise", and join this
sentence to p1; Start a new paragraph (p2) with "A nonoptional...."

[477:27 16.5.1.3p1] Insert "or declared" after "defined".

{"Defined" covers module procedures, types, and constants, but not
variables, which use <declaration-type-spec> in their declaration, and
PROCEDURE or EXTERNAL statements, which define an interface but declare
a name.}

2. USE and host association and previous declaration or definition
------------------------------------------------------------------

At some places, the standard says "defined previously" or "declared
previously."  At other places it adds "in the [same] scoping unit or
accessed by use or host association."  From the syntax, it seems clear
that something (other than another module procedure) that is accessed by
host association is previously defined or declared.  To avoid clutter
(and have a better chance of getting it right everywhere), add a
sentence to 11.2.2 that says entities accessed by use association are
considered to have been previously defined.  Then clean out the clutter.

[277:2+ 11.2.2p2] At the end of the paragraph, insert a sentence: "A
use-associated entity is considered to have been previously defined."

[54:3-4 4.3.2.2p2] Replace the first sentence with "A
<derived-type-spec> in a TYPE type specifier in a type declaration
statement shall specify a previously defined derived type."

[104:8-9 5.5.13p2] Replace "in the same ... association" with "defined
previously; it may be defined previously in the same statement" or
"defined previously, perhaps in the same statement" (editor's choice).

[110:11 C581] Replace "declared" with "defined".  Delete "in the scoping
... association".

[110:20-21 C582] Replace "declared" with "defined".  Delete "in the
scoping ... association".
