To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-143
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Type and type parameters of statement or construct entity
Reference:  16-007
Date: 2016 January 25

1. Introduction
===============

In 16.4p4, p5, and p10, certain variables that are statement or
construct entities are specified to have the same type and type
parameters that they would have if they were variables in the innermost
executable construct or scoping unit containing the statement or
construct.

This does not cover the case of a variable of the same name existing (or
not existing) in the innermost executable construct or scoping unit, and
IMPLICIT NONE is applicable.

2. Edits
========

[490:21 16.4p5] Replace "otherwise" with "otherwise if there is a
variable of the same name in the innermost executable construct or
scoping unit containing the DATA statement or array constructor it has
the same type and type parameters as that variable, and that type shall
be integer; otherwise if IMPLICIT NONE is not in effect in the innermost
executable construct or scoping unit containing the DATA statement or
array constructor".

[490:23 16.4p5] After "integer type" insert "; otherwise the
<data-i-do-variable> or <ac-do-variable> has no type and the DATA
statement or array constructor is invalid".

[490:29 16.4p6] Replace "otherwise" with "otherwise if there is a
variable of the same name in the innermost executable construct or
scoping unit containing the DO CONCURRENT \obs{or FORALL} it has the
same type and type parameters as that variable, and that type shall be
integer; otherwise if IMPLICIT NONE is not in effect in the innermost
executable construct or scoping unit containing the DO CONCURRENT
\obs{or FORALL}".

[490:31 16.4p6] After "integer type" insert "; otherwise the
<index-name> has no type and the DO CONCURRENT \obs{or FORALL}" is
invalid".

[491:8 16.4p10] Replace "It" with "If there is a variable of the same
name in the scoping unit containing the statement function statement it
has the same type and type parameters as that variable, and that type
shall be integer; otherwise if IMPLICIT NONE is not in effect in the
scoping unit containing the statement function statement it".

[491:9 16.4p10] After "function" insert "; otherwise the statement
function dummy argument has no type and the statement function statement
is invalid".
