To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-141
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Questions without answers or edits concerning Clause 14
Reference:  16-007
Date: 2016 January 25

General: For the arithmetic functions with two arguments, e.g.,
IEEE_REM, are arguments with different radices supported?  It should
either be stated explicitly, or denied explicitly.

[423:12 14.3p1] In the IEEE_INVALID list item, we see that IEEE_INVALID
occurs when X is real and has a nonzero negative value.  Does it signal
for IEEE_SQRT(-0.0)?

[427:0+2] Does the value of a named constant depend upon the rounding
mode?

[431:1 14.10p4] Is the assertion of the paragraph correct, or are the
elemental functions only provided for all real X and Y of kinds for
which IEEE_SUPPORT_DATATYPE ( X ) or IEEE_SUPPORT_DATATYPE ( Y ) has the
value true?

[437:37-38 14.11.18p6] Should the results be ABS(Y) and ABS(X)?

[438:34-35 14.11.20p6] Should the results be ABS(X) and ABS(Y)?

[439:14 14.11.21p6] Does "in the direction of Y" mean "in the direction
of the sign of Y" or "in the direction from X to Y?"  E.g., is
IEEE_NEXT_AFTER ( 1.0, 0.5 ) == 1.0 + EPSILON(1.0) or 1.0 -
EPSILON(1.0)?

[439:30 14.11.12p6] The result value paragraph says that only
IEEE_INVALID can signal from IEEE_NEXT_DOWN.  Does IEEE_INEXACT signal
if the result is subnormal?  Can IEEE_UNDERFLOW signal?

[440:7 14.11.13p6] The result value paragraph says that only
IEEE_INVALID can signal from IEEE_NEXT_UP.  Does IEEE_INEXACT signal if
the result is subnormal, e.g., from IEEE_NEXT_UP ( 0.0 )?  Can
IEEE_OVERFLOW signal, e.g., from IEEE_NEXT_UP ( HUGE(0.0) )?

[443:18-22 14.11.32] Does IEEE_RINT signal with the same signals and
under the same conditions as IEEE_INT?

[443:29 14.11.33p3] Is decimal radix X allowed?

