                                                           J3/16-186
To: J3
From: John Reid and Bill Long
Subject: UTI 21
Date: 2016 May 18

Discussion
----------

We agree that it will be helpful to refer to the team that was current
for the execution of the CHANGE TEAM statement as the "original" team.

We think also that it will be helpful to refer to the team that is
current for the execution of the body of the construct as the "new"
team.

We have rewritten the paragraph and broken it it three paragraphs in
hope of making it easier to understand.

There appears to be no requirement that after the END TEAM, the current
team goes back to being the original team (see 5.1, para 2 in the TS).
An edit is proposed to correct this.

Edit to J3/16-007r1
-------------------

[177:28] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, end of para 2, add sentence:
"This restores the current team to the team that was current for the
CHANGE TEAM statement.".

[178:10-19] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, replace para 5 by

"All active images of the current team shall execute the same CHANGE
TEAM statement.

When a CHANGE TEAM statement is executed, there is an implicit
synchronization of all active images of each new team that is
identified by <team-variable>.  On each active image of the new team,
execution of the segment following the CHANGE TEAM statement is
delayed until all other active images of that team have executed the
same statement the same number of times since execution last began in
the original team.

When a CHANGE TEAM construct completes execution, there is an implicit
synchronization of all active images in the new team.  On each active
image of the new team, execution of the segment following the END TEAM
statement is delayed until all other active images of the team have
executed the same construct the same number of times since execution
last began in the original team."

[178:1-] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, para 5, delete UTI 21.
