To: J3                                                       J3/16-157r1
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Alternative approaches to UTI 13, UTI 14
Date: 2016 February 08
Reference: 16-007, 16-114

1. Introduction
===============

The cause of UTI 13 and UTI 14 is suboptimal description of the new
"module accessibility" feature.

Instead of describing it in terms of "accessibility of the module" it
should be described in terms of "accessibility of identifiers accessed
from the module."  The description of the default accessibility of an
identifier accessed by use association and for which default
accessibility is specified indirectly by the name of a module from which
it is accessed appearing as the <access-name> in an <access-stmt> should
appear in 5.6.1, the only place where that form of access control is
described.

Alternatively, the new feature could be deleted, since it has very
narrow usefulness.

2. Edits
========

[xvii:5 Introduction under "Program units and procedures] Replace "that
of" with "the default accessibility of".

[92:12-15 5.5.2p3] Replace "An identifier ... otherwise." with "An
identifier whose accessibility is not explicitly specified has default
accessibility (5.6.1)."

{The concept the replaced material attempts to describe should be
described in 5.6.1, where the only way to declare it appears.}

[106:33-34 5.6.1p1] Delete "Appearance of a module ... from that
module."

[106:42+ 5.6.1p1+] Insert a paragraph:

"If an identifier is accessed by use association and not declared in the
module, and the name of every module from which it is accessed appears
in an <access-stmt> in the scoping unit, its default accessibility is
PRIVATE if the <access-spec> in every such <access-stmt> is PRIVATE, or
PUBLIC if the <access-spec> in any such <access-stmt> is PUBLIC."

Delete UTI 13 and UTI 14 if this adequately addresses the problem they
describe.
