                                                           J3/16-186r2
To: J3
From: John Reid & Bill Long
Subject: UTI 21
Date: 2016 June 09

Discussion
----------

We agree that it will be helpful to refer to the team that was current
for the execution of the CHANGE TEAM statement as the "original" team.

We think also that it will be helpful to refer to the team that is
current for the execution of the body of the construct as the "new"
team.

We have rewritten the paragraph and broken it into three paragraphs in
hope of making it easier to understand.

There appears to be no requirement that after the END TEAM, the current
team goes back to being the original team (see 5.1, para 2 in the TS).
An edit is proposed to correct this.

Edit to J3/16-007r1
-------------------

[177:28] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, end of para 2, change
"statement." to "statement, which restores the current team to the
team that was current for the CHANGE TEAM statement.".

[178:10-19] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, replace para 5 by

"All active images of the current team shall execute the same CHANGE
TEAM statement.

When a CHANGE TEAM statement is executed successfully, there is an
implicit synchronization of all images of the new team that is
identified by <team-variable>. On each image of the new team,
execution of the segment following the CHANGE TEAM statement is
delayed until all other images of that team have executed the
same statement the same number of times in the original team.

If the new team contains a failed image and no other error condition
occurs, there is an implicit synchronization of all active images of
the new team. On each active image of the new team, execution of the
segment following the CHANGE TEAM statement is delayed until all other
active images of that team have executed the same statement the same
number of times in the original team.

When a CHANGE TEAM construct completes execution, there is an implicit
synchronization of all active images in the new team.  On each active
image of the new team, execution of the segment following the END TEAM
statement is delayed until all other active images of this team have
executed the same construct the same number of times in this team."

[178:1-] In 8.1.5 CHANGE TEAM construct, para 5, delete UTI 21.
