To: J3                                                     J3/16-170
From: Steve Lionel
Subject: Procedure Actual Argument and Procedure Pointer Dummy
Date: 2016 March 09

Reference: 10-007r1,16-007

Fortran 2008 introduced a feature allowing a non-pointer actual argument
to be passed to a pointer dummy argument. The data pointer case is
described in 12.5.2.7p2:

"If the dummy argument does not have the INTENT (IN), the actual argument
shall be a pointer. Otherwise, the actual argument shall be a pointer or
a valid target for the dummy pointer in a pointer assignment statement.
If the actual argument is not a pointer, the dummy pointer becomes pointer
associated with the actual argument."

and is mentioned in the Introduction:

"An actual argument with the TARGET attribute can correspond to a dummy
pointer."

Furthermore, C.9.4 discusses "Pointers and targets as arguments" and
describes the case of data pointers.

However, Fortran 2008 also added the corresponding feature for procedure
pointers, as described in 12.5.2.9p5:

"If a dummy argument is a procedure pointer, the corresponding actual
argument shall be a procedure pointer, a reference to a function that
returns a procedure pointer, a reference to the intrinsic function NULL,
or a valid target for the dummy pointer in a pointer assignment
statement. If the actual argument is not a pointer, the dummy argument
shall have the INTENT (IN) and becomes pointer associated with the actual
argument."

This new feature is not mentioned in the introduction, nor is it covered
in C.9.4. (16-007 corrects the grammar in the last sentence of
12.5.2.9p5.)

As there will be no more Corrigenda for Fortran 2008, it is unnecessary
to process an interpretation request for this. Since the procedure case
is not new in Fortran 2015, it doesn't need to be added to its
Introduction, but C.9.4 needs edits to include it.

Edits to 16-007

[552:29, C.9.4p1]

After "a nonpointer variable" insert "or procedure".

The sentence now reads: "If a dummy argument is declared to be a pointer
the corresponding actual argument could be a pointer, or could be a
nonpointer variable or procedure."

[552:35, C.9.4p1]

After "TARGET attribute" insert "or is a procedure,".

The sentence now reads: "This only occurs when the actual argument has
the TARGET attribute or is a a procedure, and the dummy argument has the
INTENT (IN) attribute."

(The editor is welcome to wordsmith or add/remove commas as he sees fit.)
