To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-264
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Comments on Clause 12
References: 16-007r2
Date: 2016 September 28

1. Edits
--------

[217:29 12.2.2p1] Replace "However, it may" with "It may also".

[220:33+2 NOTE 12.8] Replace "Because" with "If".  Delete "the" before
"record" {because the file structure isn't necessarily determined by
record markers in the file}.

[221:24-25 12.3.4.2p2] Delete "It is also possible ... their lengths"
{because this does not any longer depend upon nonadvancing input}.

[223:4 12.4p2(1)] After "character" insert "type".

[223:22 12.4p2(10)] Before "formatted" insert "nonadvancing".

[225:31-34 12.5.4p5] Before "main program" insert "program with a"
{because program units other than the main program might perform
input/output operations}.

[226:5 12.5.5p1] Delete "the" before "prior" {because "the" implies
there is exactly one prior execution of an OPEN statement}.

[227:21 C1203] Before "No" insert "(R1204)" {because there's only one
BNF rule for <connect-spec> and <connect-spec-list> only appears in
R1204}.

[228:27 12.5.6.7p1] Replace "This" with "It" {because "It" seems to be
more common among similar descriptions}.

[230:5 12.5.6.16p1] Replace "This" with "It" {because "It" seems to be
more common among similar descriptions}.

[230:10 12.5.6.17p1] Replace "This" with "It" {because "It" seems to be
more common among similar descriptions}.

[230:22+ 12.5.6.18p3+] Move NOTE 12.21 to be after 12.5.6.18p3.

[234:10-13 12.6.2.3] Move 12.6.2.3 NML= to [235:3+ 12.6.2.9+] between
ID= and PAD=, to put subclauses in alphabetical order.

[239:3-4 12.6.4.1p1] Delete the paragraph because the direction of
transfer has not been determined, and the unit has not yet been
identified.  It reappears below.

[239:8+ 12.6.4.1p2(2)+] Insert a list item:

"(2a) Execution of a WRITE or PRINT statement for a file that does not
exist creates the file.  If an error occurs, steps 3 through 8 are
skipped." {Existing steps 3-8.}

[239:26+ 12.6.4.1p3(2)+] Insert a list item:

"(2a) Execution of a WRITE or PRINT statement for a file that does not
exist creates the file.  If an error occurs, steps 4 through 8 are
skipped." {Existing steps 4-8.}

[241:31 12.6.4.5.1p8] Before "transferring" insert "evaluating an
expression in an input list item or" {because a function therein is not
required to be pure.}

[244:9 12.6.4.8.3p1] Replace "The user need not" with "It is not
necessary to" {because the program might have been produced by other
than a human "user"}.

[245:40 12.6.4.8.3p12] After "invoked" insert "by the processor during
execution of a parent data transfer statement" {because it is not
prohibited to invoke a defined input/output procedure directly}.

[247:21 12.6.4.8.3p28] At the end of the paragraph append a sentence: "A
defined input procedure, and any procedures invoked therefrom, shall not
reference any storage unit referenced by or associated with any input
item, or any specifier that might be changed by an active parent data
transfer statement.  A defined output procedure, and any procedures
invoked therefrom, shall not reference any part of an internal file
designated by the \cf{unit} argument, or any storage unit associated
therewith." {Because the input items etc. might not yet be defined.}

[247:21+2 NOTE 12.45] The note improperly expresses requirements.
Replace "shall not" with "is not allowed to".

[250:16+ 12.7.1p5+] Insert a paragraph:

"If no error condition occurs during a wait operation for a unit, the
variable associated with the SIZE= specifier in the statement that
initiated the trasfer, if any, becomes defined as specified in
12.6.2.15."

[253:29+ 12.10.1p2+] Insert a paragraph:

"For inquiry by file, the file specified need not exist or be connected
to a unit.  If it is connected to a unit, the inquiry is being made
about the connection and about the unit connected."

2. Questions without edits
--------------------------

[219:3-7 12.3.2p3] Is it processor dependent whether stdin, stdout, and
stderr exist?

[232:34 C1216] Why is namelist prohibited for direct access?  It can't
be because namelist input or output might require more than one record,
because formatted input or output could require more than one record.

[233:6-7 C1220] Why is list-directed prohibited for direct access?  It
can't be because list-directed input or output might require more than
one record, because formatted input or output could require more than
one record.

[251:3-4 12.7.2p3] What happens if the expression specified by the ID=
specifier is zero?  Is it the same as the specifier not appearing?

[252:8 12.8.3p1] Should "also may be" be "is"?

[256:12-17 12.10.2.10] Should the description of the ENCODING= specifier
include DEFAULT encoding, instead of producing UNDEFINED if the
connection is not using UTF-8 encoding?

[261:16+ 12.11.3p1(2)+] Is the variable specified in the SIZE= specifier
defined (or undefined) if an end-of-file condition occurs?
