To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-260
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Comments on Clause 9
References: 16-007r2
Date: 2016 September 28

1. Edits
--------

[130:4 9.3p1] A reference to a named constant is not permitted if its
name is not accessible.  Insert "literal" before "constant".  Replace ";
redefinition" with ".  A reference to a named constant is permitted if
its name is accessible.  Redefinition".

[131:27 9.4.2p6] Sentence doesn't allow host association.  Replace "A
... base object" with "If a structure component is referenced or
defined, the declaration of the base object shall appear before the
reference or definition, or be accessible by use or host association."
There is no statement in 19.5.1.4 comparable to the last sentence of
14.2.2p2, viz. "A use-associated entity is considered to have been
previously defined."  {"use or" could be left out because Clause 14 says
that, but Clause 19 doesn't say that host association implies previous
definition or declaration.}

[131:28 9.4.2p6] Attributes are not defined.  Replace "is defined to
have" with "has".  {or "is declared to have" but that's more wordy than
necessary.}

[132:19 9.4.5p2] Before "shall not" insert "is undefined and therefore".

[133:0+7 NOTE 9.8]  The inquiry "b(10)%kind" is not about an array
element.  According to NOTE 9.7 (which I presume is supported by
normative text somewhere), the inquiry "b%kind" would not be an array.
The inquiry "b(10)%kind" is an inquiry about a scalar property of the
base object, no matter whether it's a scalar or an array.  The comment
is misleading.  Replace with it "Inquiry about the kind of b".

[139:26-27 C945] For consistency with the style of C936, replace "The"
with "If an <allocate-object> is a coarray, the".  After "ISO_C_BINDING"
delete "if an <allocate-object> is a coarray".

[141:39 9.7.1.3p4] After "unsaved" insert "allocatable".  Nonallocatable
variables have neither allocated nor unallocated allocation status.

[142:2 9.7.1.3p5] Replace "created" with "allocated".

[142:5-7 9.7.1.3p6] Replace "evaluation" with "execution".  After each
"allocation status" insert "or pointer association status".  Then move
the paragraph to [141:19+ 9.7.1.2p9+] because it applies equally well to
allocatable and pointer variables.

[142:30+2 NOTE 9.21] Append a sentence "When an array pointer is
undefined, its bounds are undefined.  When a pointer that has deferred
length type parameters is undefined, the values of those type parameters
are undefined." {I think this is normative somewhere -- maybe Clause 19.
If not, it needs to be.}

[144:3-4 9.7.3.2p10] Before "those images" insert "each of".  After
"occurs" insert "on that image".  {Otherwise images that stop or fail
during the deallocation are required to participate in the
synchronization.}

[144:12+8 NOTE 9.23] Replace "will be" with "is".

[144:12+8 NOTE 9.24] Replace "For example, executing" with "Executing"
because the note isn't an example about anything discussed nearby.

[144:27-28 9.7.4p3] Replace "one or more images" with "any image of the
current team".

[145:20 9.7.5p2] Replace "an error condition occurs" with "a nonzero
value is assigned to a STAT= variable".  After "statement" insert ", or
would be assigned if it appeared," because STAT_STOPPED_IMAGE and
STAT_FAILED_IMAGE are not error conditions.  Presumably, we want a
message even in those cases.

2. TEAM_NUMBER
--------------

Since Fortran 90, processors have been able to do generic resolution.
[137:20 R926] doesn't need two keywords.  The distinction between
<team-variable> and <scalar-int-variable> is obvious, and good enough.

[137:20] Replace "TEAM_NUMBER" with "TEAM".

[137:22 C928] Delete C928 because it's no longer necessary.

[137:28 9.6p3] Insert "<team-variable>" after "TEAM=".

[137:30 9.6p3] Replace "TEAM_NUMBER=" with
"TEAM=<<scalar-int-variable>".

3. Question without edits
-------------------------

[131:10 C915] Why is a section subscript list required if an image
selector appears?  Does this prevent some kind of subtle problem, or
does it simply remove a syntactic ambiguity?

[136:11 9.5.4p1] Is the third list element different from the first one?
