To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-248
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Locality specs in DO CONCURRENT
References: 16-007r2, 16-199, N2113
Date: 2016 September 28

During the interval since meeting 210, a persuasive argument was
advanced that facilities that can be provided by directives ought not to
be incorporated as features of the language.  A complementary argument
was that features ought not to be added if the facilities they would
provide can be gotten resonably using extant features.  A further
supporting argument was that vendors already have too much on their
plates, and the size of the present revision, and perhaps future ones as
well, ought to be limited by not entertaining such features.

The directives for locality specifications are not simply in principle
available in some future hypothetical processor: they are already
provided by OpenMP directives.  If one prefers not to use those
directives, their effect can be gotten by using object declarations and
IMPORT statements within a BLOCK construct within a DO CONCURRENT
construct.

According to those arguments, and the apparent consensus of their
advantages, locality specs ought to be deleted from the current
revision.

The excuse that we don't have sufficient syntactic sugar for LOCAL_INIT
rings hollow, since a more generally useful feature, viz. syntax for
local automatic reinitialization without acquiring the SAVE attribute,
maybe something like

  real, automatic :: MyX(size(x)) = x

has been requested for decades.  Providing this feature only for local
variables of DO CONCURRENT constructs, using irregular syntax, amplifies
the "beloved Fortran tacked-on look," and gives university professors
what they consider to be additional reason to snicker about Fortran, and
to refuse to teach it.

In the next revision after Fortran 2015, the DO CONCURRENT construct
ought to have a specification part.  Indeed, the <block> of every
construct ought to have a specification part.  This is not exactly a new
concept.  It existed in Algol in 1958.  Algol did not spring
fully-formed from the forehead of Zeus, so somebody was clearly
contemplating this concept nearly sixty years ago.  It has been
requested for Fortran repeatedly.  I requested it on page 30 of
97-114r2, in section 19, nearly twenty years ago.  I have donated my
paper correspondence with X3J3 from during the time of development of
Fortran 90 to the Computer History Museum, and e-mail correspondence was
not archived before about 1997.  Having studied and used Algol, Pascal,
Modula 2, and Ada, I might have requested it before 1997, but I have no
firm recollection of whether that is true.

Until the <block> of the DO CONCURRENT construct, or better the <block>
of every construct, has a specification part, textbooks (and the
standard) can recommend using declarations within a BLOCK construct
within a DO CONCURRENT construct to provide the functionality of OpenMP
locality specification directives.

2. Edits
========

[xviii intro under "Data usage and computation"] Delete "The locality
... explicitly specified."

[188:23 R1123] Delete "<concurrent-locality>".

[188:30-34 R1129-R1130] Delete syntax rules R1129 and R1130.

[189:4-20 C1125-C1130] Delete constraints C1125, C1126, C1127, C1128,
C1129, and C1130.

[192:12-36 11.1.7.5p1-3] Delete 11.1.7.5p1-3

[192:37 11.1.7.5p4] Replace the introduction to the list with "If a
variable appears within a DO CONCURRENT construct and"

[192:38,41,44, 193:1,3,5 11.1.7.5p4] Replace "if it" with "it" six
times.

[193:7+ 11.1.7.5p4+] Insert NOTE 11.9a:

  "NOTE 11.9a
     Variable declarations within a BLOCK construct within a DO
     CONCURRENT construct can specify explicitly which variables are not
     to be shared between iterations.  IMPORT statements can specify
     explicitly which variables are imported into a BLOCK construct
     within a DO CONCURRENT construct and shared between iterations, or
     that none are imported."

[514:11-12 19.4p1] Delete "A variable that has LOCAL or LOCAL_INIT
locality in a DO CONCURRENT construct is a construct entity."

[514:36-37 19.4p6] Delete 19.4p6, viz. "A variable that has LOCAL or
LOCAL_INIT locality in a DO CONCURRENT construct has the scope of that
construct.  Its attributes are specified in 11.1.7.5."

[521:22-23 19.5.2.5p1(13)] Delete list item (13), viz. "An iteration of
a DO CONCURRENT construct completes and the pointer is associated with a
variable of that construct that has LOCAL or LOCAL_INIT locality."

[527:32-33 19.6.5p1(26)] Delete list item (26), viz. "In a DO CONCURRENT
construct, a variable with LOCAL_INIT locality becomes defined at the
beginning of each iteration."

[529:26-27 19.6.6p1(18)] Delete list item (18), viz. "When execution of
an iteration of a DO CONCURRENT construct completes, a construct entity
of that construct which has LOCAL or LOCAL_INIT locality becomes
undefined."
