                                                            J3/16-260r1
To: J3
From: Van Snyder & Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Comments on Clause 9
Date: 2016 October 10

1. Edits accepted (with modifications)

[131:28] 9.4.2 Structure components, p6
  "is defined to have the POINTER attribute"->"has the POINTER attribute".
{Simplify wording, make more consistent with wording elsewhere.}

[141:39] 9.7.1.3 Allocation of allocatable variables, p4,
  "An unsaved local variable" -> "An unsaved allocatable local variable".
{Make more precise.}

[144:27-28] 9.7.4 STAT= specifier, p3
  After "one or more images" insert "of the current team".
{Apparently overlooked missing current team limitation.}


2. Edits rejected

[130:4 9.3p1] A reference to a named constant is not permitted if its
name is not accessible.  Insert "literal" before "constant".  Replace ";
redefinition" with ".  A reference to a named constant is permitted if
its name is accessible.  Redefinition".

REJECTED: If the name is not accessible, then in that scoping unit the
          name is already not the name of a named constant.  Being
          physically impossible to be referenced is not the same as
          not being permitted to be referenced.

[131:27 9.4.2p6] Sentence doesn't allow host association.  Replace "A
... base object" with "If a structure component is referenced or
defined, the declaration of the base object shall appear before the
reference or definition, or be accessible by use or host association."
There is no statement in 19.5.1.4 comparable to the last sentence of
14.2.2p2, viz. "A use-associated entity is considered to have been
previously defined."  {"use or" could be left out because Clause 14 says
that, but Clause 19 doesn't say that host association implies previous
definition or declaration.}

REJECTED: Something is only available by host association if it is
          previously declared, by construction.

[132:19 9.4.5p2] Before "shall not" insert "is undefined and therefore".

REJECTED: A type parameter is not a variable.
          Only variables have definition status.

[133:0+7 NOTE 9.8]  The inquiry "b(10)%kind" is not about an array
element.  According to NOTE 9.7 (which I presume is supported by
normative text somewhere), the inquiry "b%kind" would not be an array.
The inquiry "b(10)%kind" is an inquiry about a scalar property of the
base object, no matter whether it's a scalar or an array.  The comment
is misleading.  Replace with it "Inquiry about the kind of b".

REJECTED: Correct as is.

[139:26-27 C945] For consistency with the style of C936, replace "The"
with "If an <allocate-object> is a coarray, the".  After "ISO_C_BINDING"
delete "if an <allocate-object> is a coarray".

REJECTED: Correct as is.

[142:2 9.7.1.3p5] Replace "created" with "allocated".

REJECTED: Correct as is.

[142:5-7 9.7.1.3p6] Replace "evaluation" with "execution".  After each
"allocation status" insert "or pointer association status".  Then move
the paragraph to [141:19+ 9.7.1.2p9+] because it applies equally well to
allocatable and pointer variables.

REJECTED: Correct as is.

[142:30+2 NOTE 9.21] Append a sentence "When an array pointer is
undefined, its bounds are undefined.  When a pointer that has deferred
length type parameters is undefined, the values of those type parameters
are undefined." {I think this is normative somewhere -- maybe Clause 19.
If not, it needs to be.}

REJECTED: The bounds of an array pointer are not a variable, and therefore
          do not have a definition status.

[144:3-4 9.7.3.2p10] Before "those images" insert "each of".  After
"occurs" insert "on that image".  {Otherwise images that stop or fail
during the deallocation are required to participate in the
synchronization.}

REJECTED: There does not appear to be any problem here.

[144:12+8 NOTE 9.23] Replace "will be" with "is".

REJECTED: Correct as is.

[144:12+8 NOTE 9.24] Replace "For example, executing" with "Executing"
because the note isn't an example about anything discussed nearby.

REJECTED: Antecedent is previous normative sentence (p12).

[145:20 9.7.5p2] Replace "an error condition occurs" with "a nonzero
value is assigned to a STAT= variable".  After "statement" insert ", or
would be assigned if it appeared," because STAT_STOPPED_IMAGE and
STAT_FAILED_IMAGE are not error conditions.  Presumably, we want a
message even in those cases.

REJECTED: These are error conditions.


3. TEAM_NUMBER
--------------

RESPONSE: Suggested changes to use TEAM= instead of TEAM_NUMBER= have been
          communicated to /HPC for further consideration in a potential
          future paper.


3. Question without edits
-------------------------

[131:10 C915] Why is a section subscript list required if an image
selector appears?  Does this prevent some kind of subtle problem, or
does it simply remove a syntactic ambiguity?

RESPONSE: This was a deliberate design decision in Fortran 2008.

[136:11 9.5.4p1] Is the third list element different from the first one?

RESPONSE: Yes.

===END===
