To:         J3 Members                                       J3/17-185
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Inconsistent use of previously, earlier, accessible
References: 17-007r2
Date: 2017 July 28

1. Discussion
=============

14.2.2p2 [297:1] says "a use-associated entity is considered to have
been previously defined."  We frequently use "previously declared"
without adding "or accessed by use or host association."  Hopefully, a
use-associated variable is considered to have been previously declared;
if it is, 14.2.2p2 should say so.  A similar explicit statement
concerning host association would be helpful.

8.9p5 [125:20-22] specifies that a namelist group object shall either be
accessed by host or use association, or previously declared by using an
unnecessarily detailed list about how it could be declared.

We use "earlier" in subclause 4.3 to refer to previous standards.  We
usually use "previously" to to refer to previous declaration or
definition, but use "earlier" four times.  Three of those are in
constraints on statement functions (C1576-77), with which we might not
wish to meddle.

Edits are proposed to make descriptions more consistent.

2. Edits
========

"{...}" in inserted text means hyperlink.

[125:20-22 8.9p5 NAMELIST statement] Replace the first sentence, viz. "A
namelist group object ... scoping unit" with "The {declared type}, kind
type parameters of the {declared type}, and {rank} of a namelist group
object shall have been previously declared, or implied by implicit
typing rules in effect for the scoping unit."

[297:1 14.2.2p2 The USE statement and use association] Before "defined"
insert "declared or".

[310:15 C1514(4)15.4.3.4.5 Restrictions on generic declarations] Replace
"earlier in the argument list than" with "appear in the argument list
before".  Since this doesn't refer to a definition, there might not be
any reason to do this edit.

[518:1 19.5.1.4p1 Host association]  Before "In the case..." insert a
sentence "A host-associated entity is considered to have been previously
declared or defined."
