To: J3                                                     J3/18-117r1
From: Bill Long
Subject: Put with Notify
Date: 2018-February-13


Discussion:
-----------

A capability called "put with notify" is popular in the SHMEM
community as a very efficient, narrowly focused, synchronization
technique for data transfers between images. The basic idea is to
combine a "put" (definition of a variable on a different image) with a
notification mechanism that allows the receiving image to know that
the data has arrived.  While long requested for coarrays in Fortran,
there was previously no simple syntax to allow for two things (the put
and the notify) on the left side of an assignment.  Fortran 2018
introduced specifiers as part of an image selector, which could be
extended to overcome this problem.

Feature outline:
----------------

Extend the image selector syntax to allow a NOTIFY = <notify-variable>
specifier in the variable of an assignment. For example,

   x[10, notify=nx] = y

where nx is a coarray declared type(notify_type). Type notify_type
would be defined in the iso_fortran_env module and has properties
similar to event variables (an integer count that is atomically
incremented).

The effective notify operation is to the nx variable on the same image
as specified by the image selector.  On image 10,

   notify wait(nx)
   [here it is safe to reference x and get the new value]

If x was an array "waiting" for data to be transferred to separate
elements from multiple images, the notify wait could include a count=
specifier similar to event wait.

The feature differs from the sequence of

! On image /= 10
    x[10] = y
    event post (nx)

! On image 10
    event wait (nx)
    z = x


in that the notify operation in the new feature can be incorporated
into the same data packet as the value of y, and also that the
synchronization is only on this particular transfer, and not all
outstanding memory operations on the image. In other words,

! On image /= 10
    x[10, notify=nx] = y


! On image 10
    notify wait (nx)
    z = x

does not constitute segment ordering and the notify wait statement is
not an image control statement.  The notify variable modification
semantics are like those of atomic operations with regard to segment
ordering.
