To: J3                                                     J3/19-103
From: Lorri Menard
Subject: Copy of 'jeopardy letter' sent to DOE
Date: 2018-November-26

Dear Karla and/or Damian --

United States Dept of Energy is hereby informed that the records in ICMS
for INCITS/PL22.3 - Programming Language Fortran show that none of 
designated representatives (those listed on the ICMS roster) voted on two
of the last three ballots of the group.

Your participation in the work of the committee is appreciated and we
look forward to your continued participation in the future. However,
please note that unless at least one of the designated representatives
casts a vote on the next ballot, the organization will lose voting status
membership in the committee.

For details regarding open or closed ballots, you can:

* Contact the committee Chair,
* Visit the group page at 
  https://standards.incits.org/apps/org/workgroup/pl22.3 for information.

Note: All ballots are emailed to members when they open. Email reminders
are sent to members that have not cast a vote (by the time the reminder
is sent).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
For reference, the rules under which the committee operates are 
documented in the INCITS Organization, Policies and Procedures document
stating the following:

3.8.4 Termination of Membership

3.8.4.2 Technical Committees, TGs, and SGs

Voting Members of the TCs, TGs and SGs shall be warned in writing upon 
failure of the organization to:

1. attend two out of three successive meetings. If they are not 
   represented at the next meeting, the organization is converted to 
   Advisory status; or

2. return two out of three successive non accelerated LBs. If the next 
   non accelerated LB (identified by LB number) after the warning is not 
   returned, the organization is converted to Advisory status.

Voting and advisory memberships shall be canceled by the INCITS 
Secretariat for failure to pay appropriate service fees within the time
specified by the INCITS Secretariat.

An organization that has had its voting membership converted to Advisory 
status or terminated may re-establish membership in accordance with 
Sections 3.7, Application for Membership, and 3.8, Categories of 
Membership.
If this membership is re-established within the same billing period and
the organization has paid its fee, no new service fee shall be assessed.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

An organization that has had its voting membership terminated may 
re-establish membership in accordance with the INCITS Organization, 
Policies and Procedures. If this membership is re-established within the 
same billing period and the organization has paid its fee, no new service
fee shall be accessed.

Section 3.8.1.3 TCs, TGs, and SGs

An organization may be a member of a particular TC or a TG without regard
to membership in any other IOE.

Voting membership in TCs, TGs, and SGs is open to all directly and 
materially affected parties that meet attendance and voting requirements
and pay the designated service fee(s).

A representative of a prospective voting member shall initially attend a 
meeting of the TC, TG, or SG without voting privileges and reaffirm 
interest in the work of the TC, TG, or SG. Voting privileges become 
effective with attendance at one of the next two successive meetings and 
receipt by the Secretariat of the applicable fees for the membership 
year. For a new TC, TG, or SG, all attendees at the formation meeting or 
second meeting shall be considered voting members, subject to the rules 
in Section 3.8.2, Limits on Voting Membership.

An organization with voting membership shall appoint one and only one 
principal representative and may appoint one or more alternate 
representatives.

In order to comply with ANSI requirements, while all parties may 
participate in a discussion of U.S. positions, only those organizations 
which are a U.S. National Interested Party may vote to establish a U.S. 
position on TAG matters.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The complete copy of the INCITS Organization, Policies and Procedures can
be found at http://www.incits.org/policies.

This jeopardy notice was sent by an automated system. If you believe this
notice was sent in error or you have any questions, please contact the 
chairman of the committee or the INCITS Secretariat at lbarra@itic.org.

Sincerely,
INCITS





