To: J3                                                     J3/19-227
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Ada (WG9) Liaison Report
Date: 2019-October-05

The Ada committees (WG9 and Ada Rapporteur Group -- ARG) met in
Lexington, MA 5-7 October 2019, 8:30 AM EDT.

Join Zoom Meeting
https://zoom.us/j/317366183

Meeting ID: 317 366 183

One item on the agenda is a presentation on OpenMP:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The OpenMP Consortium CEO, Michael Klemm (and tentatively the GOMP
developer Jakub Jelinek) will join us on Sunday morning to talk about
OpenMP and Ada 202X.

Any WG9 members who are interested in hearing this presentation are
welcome to join the zoom video conference.

The presentation is expected to take place between 9:00am - 1:00pm EDT
(Eastern Daylight Time, US and Canada)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tucker Taft sent a link to a Google Slide presentation about Ada 202X
and OpenMP:

   http://bit.ly/openmp-ada

------------------------------------------------------------------------

An additional comment period has been announced for the upcoming
revision:

Additional Comment Period for Upcoming Ada Revision
by Randy Brukardt

ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22/WG 9 (WG 9) is responsible for the maintenance and
revision of the Ada Programming Language and associated standards and
technical reports. As part of the language maintenance activity, WG 9
has established a group of Ada experts as the Ada Rapporteur Group
(ARG). The ARG receives input from the Ada community at large to
consider for inclusion in revision to the Ada programming language
standard. The WG 9 has produced a number of revisions to the language in
accordance with ISO policy and to address the evolution of technology
(Ada 83, Ada 95, Ada 2005, Ada 2012).

Presently, the ARG is nearing completion on a revision to Ada 2012
(known for now as Ada 202x) which includes new contracts and lightweight
parallelism features. Concern has been raised that these new proposals
have not been prototyped nor has the suitability for diverse target
environments been assessed.

Therefore, the ARG is seeking comments, based on prototyping and review,
on the new features (focused on the parallelism features) incorporated
within the current draft of the Ada 202X standard. Comments should be
submitted to ada-comment@ada-auth.org as described in the Ada Reference
Manual Introduction
(http://www.ada-auth.org/standards/rm12_w_tc1/html/RM-0-3.html#p58).
Please include the draft number with any Ada Reference Manual references
in your comment. Comments should be sent by 1 June 2020 in order to be
considered for the revision. (Note: While not required, joining the
mailing list as described at http://www.ada-auth.org/comment.html is
recommended so that you receive any queries on or responses to your
comment.)

The draft revision can be found at
http://www.ada-auth.org/standards/ada2x.html. A list of issues addressed
in Ada 202x can be found at
http://www.ada-auth.org/ai-files/grab_bag/2020-Amendments.html.
