To: J3                                                     J3/21-170
From:    Van Snyder
Subject: 16.10.2.22 OUTPUT_UNIT needs to specify it works for PRINT
Date: 2021-August-03
Reference: 21-007

1. Introduction
---------------

Subclause 12.5.1p4 "Referring to a file" specifies that the unit used in
a READ statement that does not specify a unit is the same as the unit
used in a READ statement in which the unit is specified by an asterisk,
and that this is the same unit as defined by the INPUT_UNIT named
constant in the intrinsic module ISO_FORTRAN_ENV.

That paragraph goes on to specify that the unit used in a WRITE
statement in which the unit is specified by an asterisk is the same unit
as defined by the INPUT_UNIT named constant in the intrinsic module
ISO_FORTRAN_ENV, but does not mention the PRINT statement.

Subclause 16.10.2.13 "INPUT_UNIT" specifies that the unit specified by
an asterisk is the same as the unit defined by INPUT_UNIT and the same
as the unit used in a READ statement that does not include an
input/output control list. This needs to be specified in 12.4.1p4.

That the asterisk unit in a WRITE statement might be believed to be the
same unit as the one used in a PRINT statement is suggested in subclause
12.6.4.8.3p4 "Executing defined input/output data transfers" in the
second list item:

     If the parent data transfer statement is a WRITE statement with an
     asterisk unit or a PRINT statement, the unit argument shall have
     the same value as the named constant OUTPUT_UNIT in the intrinsic
     module ISO_FORTRAN_ENV.

This needs to be made explicit in 12.5.1p4, and in 16.10.2.22
"OUTPUT_UNIT".

2. Edits
--------

[217:12 12.5.1 Referring to a file] After "ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
(16.10.2.13)." insert a sentence

     "The same unit is used in a READ statement that does not contain an
     input/output control list (12.6.4.3)."

{This is already specified in 16.10.2.13.}

[217:15 12.5.1 Referring to a file] After "ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
(16.10.2.22)." insert a sentence

     "The same unit is used in a PRINT statement."

[430:29 16.10.2.22 OUTPUT_UNIT"] After "WRITE statement (12.6.4.3)"
insert a clause

     "; this unit is the one used in a PRINT statement".

{Compare this construction to 16.10.2.13 "INPUT_UNIT".}


