To: J3                                                     J3/21-179
From:    Van Snyder
Subject: Enumerator accessibility and constructor
Date: 2021-October-04
Reference: 21-007r2

1. Discussion
-------------

The access spec on the <enumeration-type-stmt> directly affects only the
enumeration type name but indirectly specifies default accessibility for
enumerator names.

Access-spec should be allowed on the <enumeration-enumerator-stmt>.

The INT and REAL intrinsic functions allow arguments of the same type as
the result. Enumeration type constructors should allow enumerator
expressions of the same type.

It should be explicitly specified whether the enumeration constructor is
elemental. R771 appears to allow an elemental interpretation (because
the "argument" is not <scalar-int-expr>).

2. Edits
--------

[91:7 Enumeration types R768] Replace the syntax rule

"R768 <enumeration-enumerator-stmt> <<is>> ENUMERATOR [ [, <access-spec>
                                           :: ] <enumerator-name-list>"

[91:13 7.6.2p2 Enumeration types] Replace "overridden by an
<access-stmt>" with "overridden by an <access-spec> on an
<enumeration-enumerator-stmt>, or an <access-stmt>".

[91:13+ 7.6.2p2+ Enumeration types] Add a constraint

"C7114a If the default accessibility of an enumerator is overridden by
        both an <access-spec> and an <access-stmt>, the <access-spec>
        and <access-stmt> shall specify the same accessibility."

OR add a paragraph

"If the default accessibility of an enumerator is overridden by
<access-spec> in <enumeration-enumerator-stmt>, that accessibility may be
further overridden by an <access-stmt>."

[91:21+ R771 7.6.2p2 Enumeration types] Add an alternative to the syntax
rule <enumeration-constructor>, another syntax rule, and a constraint

"                  <<or>> <enum-expr>"

"R771a <enum-expr> <<is>> <expr>"

"C7116a (R771) The type of <enum-expr> shall be the same as the type
        specified by <enumeration-type-spec>".

[91:22-24 7.6.2p5 Enumeration types] Replace the paragraph:

"An enumeration constructor is elemental (3.66). It returns a value of
the enumeration type whose ordinal position is the value of <int-expr>,
or the value of <enum-expr>. The value of <int-expr> shall be positive
and less than or equal to the number of enumerators in the definition of
the enumeration type."

[529:20 19.2.1p3 Classes of local identifiers] After (7.5.10) insert
"and enumerators of different enumeration types may have the same name.
If enumerators of different enumeration types that have the same name
are accessible in a scoping unit, they shall not appear within that
scoping unit except as the <enum-expr> in an <enumeration-constructor>."

3. Question
-----------

Should TINY be allowed to have an argument of enumeration type, always
returning the value 1?
