To: J3                                                     J3/21-147r1
From: Brian Friesen
Subject: Reviewing committee liaison roles
Date: 2021-June-30

1. Background

PL22.3 includes liaisons to various external committees and
organizations whose activities are relevant to the development of the
Fortran language. The INCITS Organization, Policies, and Procures
document (version 2021.07.01) defines the committee liaison role in
section 3.3.4.5 ("Liaison to other organizations"):

  The Liaison is responsible for monitoring the activities of the
  liaison organization, and disseminating relevant information from or
  about the liaison organization. Outbound Liaisons are appointed by their
  respective Chairs.

Similarly, the INCITS Officers' Official Roles and Responsibilities
document (version 2020.11.06) lists the liaison's activities in section
3.7 ("Liaison"):

  1. Review and distribute appropriate documentation from the liaison
     organization to the committee.
  2. Monitor the activity of the liaison organization and report items
     of interest to the committee.
  3. Attend meetings of the liaison organization when required.

Committee liaisons are appointed by the Chair (see section 3.1 of the
INCITS Officers document listed above).

The current list of external organizations with whom PL22.3 liaises, and
the corresponding PL22.3 liaison, is as follows:

  - IEEE 754: Bob Corbett
  - MPI: Bill Long
  - OpenMP: Bill Long
  - flang: Gary Klimowicz
  - OpenACC: Mark LeAir
  - UPC: Brian Friesen

The INCITS Secretariat is in the process of reviewing all technical
committee liaison relationships to ensure correct representatives,
approval dates, disbandments, and to reaffirm continuance of current
relationships. It is important that this information be up-to-date to
ensure that liaisons are properly recorded on the committee roster with
the current representatives and that they are participating officially
per the INCITS rules.

2. Action Items

The INCITS Secretariat has requested for PL22.3 to review each of its
technical liaisons roles listed above at Meeting 224 in June 2021. For
each of the liaison roles listed above, the committee should evaluate
the following options:

  1. Reaffirm the current liaison role and its associated committee
     member;
  2. Reaffirm the current liaison role and transfer its responsibility
     to a different committee member;
  3. Retire the liaison role altogether.

New liaison roles may also be created as needed.

3. Results

The following liaison roles were modified and/or reaffirmed at Meeting
224 of PL22.3:

  - IEEE 754: R. Corbett will continue through 2021, but a replacement
    will be needed in 2022
  - MPI: B. Long will continue
  - OpenMP: B. Long will continue
  - flang: M. LeAir will take over from G. Klimowicz
  - OpenACC: J. Larkin (a new PL22.3 member) will take over from M.
    LeAir

The following liaison roles were retired:
  - UPC: retired due to limited activity from the UPC community relevant
    to Fortran

The following new liaison roles were created:
  - fortran-lang/LFortran: O. Certik
