------------------------------------------------------------------------

             Minutes for J3 Meeting 215
             ==========================

1. Monday, February 12, 2018  8:00 am
-------------------------------------
1.1 Opening business                              D. Nagle
       Remarks from the chair                     D. Nagle
       Adoption of agenda                         D. Nagle
         Clune/Snyder : UC
       Approval of Meeting 214 minutes            D. Nagle
         Steidel / Klimowicz : UC
       INCITS/OMC report (if any)                 D. Nagle
         No news
       WG23 report (if any)                       D. Nagle
        Gary attended most recent teleconference, but did
          not actively engage
       J11 Liaison report (if any)                D. Nagle
         CPlex is winding down as J11 has accepted it.
       MPI Liaison report (if any)                B. Long
         FP16 support (128 byte)

         Fault tolerance discussions on whose responsibility it should be
         to clean up certain resources. Agreement that users would have 
         to do at least some cleanup, since MPI does not have enough 
         information to do everything.

         Exascale Computing Program: MPI survey showed Fortran losing
         some ground. Ideally use of coarrays contributed, though
         probably use of C++ and Python was the bigger reason.
   
       SHMEM bonus report                         B. Long
         The Fortran interface for Shmem is moving to an Annex. Will be 
         completely rewritten using more modern Fortran. Plans include 
         C interop to call the C library, a module (replaces the include
         file), and getting rid of the "Cray pointer" declarations and
         symmetric memory allocator, replacing them with coarrays.

       OpenMP Liaison report (if any)             B. Long
         TR6: OpenMP 5.0 Preview 2 was released during 
         Supercomputing 2017. This will be the final preview release 
         before the final OpenMP 5.0 release in November 2018.

         TR6 added the following new features (from press release):

            - Support for multilevel memory systems: OpenMP 5.0 will 
              include memory allocation mechanisms that intuitively 
              place data in different kinds of memories;

            - Support for descriptive loop optimizations: The 
              concurrent construct asserts that all iterations of the
              associated loop nest may be executed concurrently in any
              order, which will enable many implementation-specific
              compiler optimizations;

         Since the release of TR6, the language committee has continued
         to discuss further improvements for the upcoming 5.0 release. 
         Topics include:

            - Explicitly list all new Fortran 2008 features that may
              result in unspecified behavior when used in OpenMP programs
              (only CONTIGUOUS attribute has specified behavior)

            - Add clause for controlling task affinity

            - Explicitly list all new C++17 features that may result in
              unspecified behavior when used in OpenMP programs.


       UPC/PGAS Liaison report (if any)                B. Friesen
          DOE continues to show interest in UPC and related PGAS software
          for exascale computing. The DOE Exascale Computing 
          Project (ECP) is funding the Pagoda Project at LBNL, which
          consists of GASNet-Ex, a communication layer, and UPC++, a 
          C++-based interface. ECP hopes to integrate UPC++ into some of
          the applications which will run on the first generation of 
          exascale computers in the US.
       OpenACC Liaison report (if any)            G. Klimowicz
         OpenACC 2.6 was approved. New features include
            - Support for manual deep copy. Codes that heavily rely on
              derived types no longer have to be decomposed into their
              parts to be moved to the device.
            - Unified memory support, which simplifies memory management
              further. Many applications perform well without having to
              manually manage memory to the device.
            - Serial compute construct which allows the programmer
              to specify a sequence of serial code that can be moved to
              the device, even though it doesn't necessarily perform well
              on the device. This can alleviate the need to move data to
              and from the device, improving performance overall.
            - acc_get_property intrinsic that allows the programmer to
              identify things like how much memory is available on the
              device.
            - IF and IF_PRESENT clauses in HOST_DATA construct to allow
              applications that run on systems without GPUDirect to use
              the same code as those that do. Simplifies running on
              different configurations of hardware.

         The Fifth OpenACC User Group meeting will be held at GTC 2018
         March 27 7:30 PM at the Four Points Sheraton in San Jose CA. 
         https://www.eventbrite.com/e/fifth-openacc-user-group-meeting
                 -gtc-2018-march-27-tickets-42608751924

         They are seeking additions to the OpenACC runtime library for
         OpenACC 2.7, including use cases for the benefits of such 
         proposals.

       Treasurer's report                         J. Steidel
          Ended last meeting with $2313.20
          There is a $50 meeting fee
       Beginning membership report                L. Menard
         12 member organizations, 11 represented here.
         Total Membership at beginning of Meeting 215      : 13
         Majority [1 over half]                            :  7
         Quorum [1/3 of voting members, min 4 present]     :  4

          During this meeting, Steve Lionel attained voting rights
     
          Cray, Inc                   Bill Long
          Corbett                     Robert Corbett
          JPL                         Van Snyder 
          Kernelyze                   Anton Shterenlikht
          Lawrence Berkeley National  Brian Friesen
          Lionel                      Steve Lionel
          IBM                         Daniel Chen
          Intel                       Lorri Menard, Jon Steidel
          NASA                        Tom Clune
          NCAR                        Dan Nagle
          NVidia                      Gary Klimowicz
          Sandia National Labs        Damian Rouson
          University of Oregon        <not present>

          Steve Lionel, as his own entity, attains voting rights at this
          meeting
       Local arrangements                         D. Nagle
          Local host this meeting is Lorri Menard.  Please let her know if
       you have complaints about the snack selection.
       Comments from members
         Bill noted that Makki's wife has passed. maybe at WG5 we should
         have some sort of statement

       WG5; most of you have seen N2147, the user survey.  At this meeting
       we should start to come up with a list of proposed features for 
       next standard.  Steve's goal is to streamline the process.  
       Looking for 2-3 medium/large features, small number of small 
       features, and get the standard out there faster than 10 years.
       Proposal;  Everyone look over N2147 and associated sources of 
       feature requests.   Two rose to the top; generics, exceptions.
       Come up with 5 other things you think are worth doing, and
       email Steve.  we'll discuss the list tomorrow.  Hopefully there
       will be a list of 20+/- items to bring to WG5 in June.
        Proposal: Use a J3 standing document to keep track of all the
       requests

       Two tasks; get a list to Steve, get our votes straight for DIS
       There are some technical issues that Bill discovered.
       If these are minor changes, 1 month letter ballot with wg5
       If these are major changes, need to reset FDIS


1.2 Tutorials (if needed)
       Steve presented the new web site, made sure everyone could
       log in, in preparation for future meetings.


1.3 Subgroup organization                         D. Nagle
      JOR Dan (head)   Gary, Steve
          109, 115, 119
      Data  Lorri (head), Tom, Bob, Van, Damian
          108 110 111 112 113 114 116 118
      HPC   Bill (head)  Jon, Daniel, Brian, Anton
          17-200, 106, 107, 117
     Edit, interp:  No interp or edit business at this meeting.

     Two tasks; normal subgroup reports.
                Invent your top 5 items

1.4 Subgroup meetings  Adjourned at 9:30

1.5 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)
     /JOR   
        18-109 "Use case for error handling ugliness"  
        18-115 "Exception handling in Fortran"
         Subgroup suggests that these be added to WG5 work
        18-119 "Wish list for Fortran after 2015"
              This will be a good addition to archive, but not
               moved forward to WG5.

     /Data
         18-108 "Use case for generic programming"
         18-112 "Generic Programming"
         18-116 "Templates"
                Subgroup suggests that these all relate to generic
              programming, and should be added to WG5 work.

        18-110r1 "Use case for generic programming"
                will be addressed further later

        18-118 "Improved memory control"
               Subgroup suggests this not be moved forward.

      /HPC  17-200 "Allow arrays to have coarray components"
            18-117 "Put with notify"
              Still working on these papers

           18-106 "Constants and intrinsic functions"
           18-107R1 "Dummy arguments of assumed type and size"
           18-121 "Typo in A.2 para1, 4th bullet"
                These 3 papers contain DIS comments and are for vote
             on Thursday

     Adjourned at 4:45


2. Tuesday, February 13, 2018  8:00 am
--------------------------------------
2.1 F2015 Plenary (13-010)                        Subgroup Heads
     Steve will have a document for PM plenary. Split by subgroup, and
     have subgroups look over features and brainstorm possible ways of 
     developing features, look at past papers.

    /JOR 
        continue 18-109 "Use case for error handling ugliness"  
        and 18-115 "Exception handling in Fortran"
         Subgroup recommends pursuing these. Concept is a good concept,
         so let's step forward.

    /DATA 
        nothing new to add

    /HPC Continue looking at two not done with.   
       Reminder to group to please look at the DIS comments

      Recess to subgroup at 8:15

2.2 Tutorials (if needed)
2.3 Subgroup meetings
2.4 Subgroup reports (4:50 pm)   
      18-122 is a report of the "5 top things".  Everyone read it, 
      in the morning the subheads will break it out to the different
      groups
        
      /JOR 18-109, 18-115  
        For review and discussion tomorrow

      /DATA 18-113r1, 18-114r1, 18-123 w/110r1
        For review and discussion tomorrow

      /HPC
        18-121r1 for DIS comment on Thursday
        18-117r1 think it's a viable feature
        17-200r1 has an additional discussion section. Possibly feasible
       Remind people to read 18-106, 18-107r1 as DIS papers

      Recessed at 5:15 until tomorrow

3. Wednesday, February 14, 2018  8:00 am
----------------------------------------
3.1 F2015 Plenary (13-010)                        Subgroup Heads

      Note:  Straw Votes are marked with SV:, and the results are
             listed as  YES / NO / (no opinion)

      /JOR:
           18-109 "Use case for error handling ugliness" and 
           18-115 "Exception handling in Fortran" 
           After a brief discussion, the committee agrees with goals of
           these papers, but much concern about implementation.
           JOR will recommend to WG5.

      /DATA:
           18-113r1 "New types, not type aliases, from old types"
             SV: Do we continue with this?  8/1/4 

           18-114r1 "Enumeration types"
             SV: Do we continue with this?  8/1/4

           18-123 w/18-110r1 "Distilled issues for container use cases"
             Containers would not be the intrinsic thing, the intrinsic
           thing would be a means to develop containers.
           Committee to come up with enabling technologies.

      /HPC:
           18-117r1 "Put with notify"  will continue
           17-200r1 "Allow arrays with coarray components" will continue

   Recessed to subgroup 8:45

3.2 Tutorials (if needed)
3.3 Subgroup meetings
3.4 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)
     /JoR:
      Subgroup suggests these features from 18-122r1 are low priority:
     "An ability to declare a reduction variable on DO CONCURRENT. "
     "+= and *= syntax"

      Subgroup also suggests that the following features from 18-122r1
        not go forward:
      "A SWAP_ALLOCS procedure", "Strengthening existing intrinsics, i.e. 
      avoiding special processing of corner cases" and "Standardizing 
      preprocessor behavior"

      For discussion tomorrow:
      18-124  "Increase maximum line length"  
      18-125  "Asynchronous subroutine execution"
      18-126  "A0 format data edit descriptor"
      18-127  "Additional string intrinsics"
      18-120r2 "Control of leading zero in F and E format"    

     /DATA
      For discussion tomorrow:
      18-128 "Associating REAL and COMPLEX entities"
      18-130 "Extending usability of deferred-length strings"
      18-132 "Use cases for unsigned integers"
      18-133 "RANGE attribute and statement"
      18-134 "Type- or object-bound function invocation on, or subobject"
      18-135 "Use cases for unallocated list item in READ statement"
      18-136r1  "Use cases for default value for optional argument"

      /HPC
       For discussion tomorrow: 
      18-131 "HPC subgroup feature recommendations"


    Recessed until tomorrow morning 4:55

4. Thursday, February 15, 2018  8:00 am
---------------------------------------
4.1 F2015 Plenary (13-010)                        Subgroup Heads
    Answer the question;  Should we go forward with this?
    straw votes:  For forward - Never look at it again - don't care

     /JOR
       18-124  "Increase maximum line length"  
               SV:  10 - 0 - 3
       18-125  "Asynchronous subroutine execution"
               Discussion items:  Seems like a lot of potential issues
               with race conditions on arguments in the concurrently
               executing code. EVENT WAIT has segment boundary side
               effects - waiting for otherwise unrelated memory transfer
               completions. Lots of Data edits would be needed.  
               Can OpenMP tasks work here?  Also like Ada tasks.
               SV:  8 - 0 - 5
       18-126  "A0 format data edit descriptor" 
               Paper had two other straw votes, listed here:                
                 Should G0 change if A0 added? Yes:1 - No:6 - Undecided:6
                 Should A0 include Adjustl? Y:1 - N:5 - U:7   
               Should we go forward with A0? SV:  7 - 0 - 6  
       18-127  "Additional string intrinsics" 
               Discussion items:How is sprintf different from an internal
               file? Seems like a list of intrinsics that would not be
               new.  String handling not a major area for Fortran usage.
               New intrinsics in paper have potential name conflicts
               with existing user names
               SV:  7 - 1 - 5
       18-120r2 "Control of leading zero in F and E format" 
               Discussion item: Gives a way for a user to remove a
               processor dependency.
               SV:  9 - 0 - 4

     /DATA
       18-128 - "Associating REAL and COMPLEX entities"
                Discussion points: Violates tenet that pointers can't 
                point to different types.  F77 codes in paper were 
                illegal, even if in common practice.  
                  Sent back to subgroup to find solution that doesn't 
                violate basic Fortran rules.  No further action this
                meeting.

       18-130 - "Extending usability of deferred-length strings"
                This was broken up into three subcategories.
                For ERRMSG, IOMSG discussion items: Conceptually
                attractive, but likely to result in a lot of copying.
                May be too much work for vendors.
                   SV: (ERRMSG/IOMSG only)      10-2-1
                
                For intrinsics that return strings:
                   SV: 7 - 0 - 6
                For write to an internal file: Definitely may result
                in performance issues with much copying between
                buffers.
                   SV: 7 - 0 - 6
       18-132  "Use cases for unsigned integers"
                Discussion points: lack of unsigned integers is considered
                an advantage in some applications.  Interoperability
                can use signed integers without problems now.  Adding a 
                new type will affect entire underlying typing system;
                use case better addressed by BITS. Questions about
                arithmetic semantics.
                   SV: 1 - 5 - 7
       18-133  "RANGE attribute and statement"
                  Not to be brought forward
       18-134  "Type- or object-bound function invocation on, subobject"
                Discussion: This means having a part name in a designator
                being a function reference.  Suggested that parsing would
                not be straightforward.  Obvious workaround in the paper
                   SV: 3 - 0 - 10

       (Damian Rouson had to leave, changing the total to 12)  

       18-135  "Use cases for unallocated list item in READ statement"
                This was broken out from allocatables in ERRMSG, IOMSG.
                Discussion items:  Definite performance issue, as it
                would require double-reading.   Appreciate the goal, but
                seems unrealistic.  List directed could be a problem.
                Format reversion would be a problem. Simple would be 
                valuable, but complicated could be very complicated
                   SV:  0 - 8 - 4

       18-136r1  "Use cases for default value for optional argument"
                Discussion items: Contrary to providing SAVE attribute.
                Easy enough workaround in code at top of routine.  
                Possible problem passing argument to another routine
                that is expecting an optional - would the default be sent
                or the original, non-present?
                   SV:  6 - 4 - 2

        18-137 "fixing broken paragraphs"
               New for US TAG, with editorial changes.

     /HPC
       18-131 "HPC Subgroup feature recommendations"
        There are many line items in this paper; individual items have
        been called out below, with its associated straw vote.
        Reminder:  SV:  Go Forward / Do not take forward / Undecided

         Medium size features:
         Put with notify (paper 18-117r1) 
             SV: 6/0/6
         Binary compatibility of C descriptors so that a single C library
         could work with multiple Fortran implementations. (Discussion:
         there are other solutions possible) 
            SV: 11/0/1

         Small size features:
         CFI function to return text of error messages 
            SV: 10/0/2
         Any information that can help avoid OpenMP false sharing, e.g.
         intrinsics to inquire about cache sizes, and other hardware 
         features at run time. 
            SV: 1/10/1
         Processor dependent information on sizes of vector
         instruction, that helps arrange data in an optimal
         fashion for SIMD processing. 
            SV: 1/8/3
         PROTECTED structure components
            SV: 8/1/3

         Neither recommended nor opposed:
         Providing methods for easily accepting NUL-terminated strings
         in calls to Fortran from C. 
            SV: 7/0/5
         Allow more than one procedure interface to share the same
         binding name (currently disallowed by 19.2p1) 
            SV: 0/7/5
         Allow arrays and allocatables with coarray components
         (paper 17-200r1)
            SV: 4/0/7
         Bit strings. There are two options. Length is LEN or 
         a KIND parameter. Debated before, chose KIND. (discussion:
         could be used to resolve unsigned integer)
            SV: 8/0/4

         Features that are not recommended:
         An INTENT keyword that means the same as not specifying INTENT.
            SV: 7/2/3
         Proposal for requesting different memory types for different
         data objects. (paper 18-118) 
            SV: 0/9/3
         Remove requirement that LOGICAL requires one numeric storage
         unit. After discussion, proposal was changed to augment
         ISO_FORTRAN_ENV with LOGICAL kind types LOG8, LOG16, LOG32,
         LOG64. Also, while editing, add REAL16 as well (where the 
         numbers indicate number-of-bits)
            SV: 10/0/2
         PROTECTED types:  Discussion: EVENT and LOCK and NOTIFY should
         be recharacterized as protected types.  Maybe a different term?
            SV: 2/0/10
         PROTECTED pointers, similar to a pointer-to-const in C/C++: 
            SV: 5/0/7

4.2 Tutorials (if needed)
4.3 Subgroup meetings

4.4 US TAG (4:15 pm)                              D. Nagle

4.4.1 Five-year National Maintenance review of 
      INCITS/ISO/IEC 1539-1:2010[2013]: Information technology - 
      Programming languages - Fortran - Part 1: Base language
      The options for national maintenance are:
      - Reaffirmation
      - Withdrawal
      - Stabilization (does not apply to technical reports)
    Motion to reaffirm the F2008 standard by Nagle/Lionel.
    Roll call vote below

          Cray, Inc                   Bill Long           y
          Corbett                     Robert Corbett      y
          JPL                         Van Snyder          y
          Kernelyze                   Anton Shterenlikht  y
          Lawrence Berkeley National  Brian Friesen       y
          Lionel                      Steve Lionel        y
          IBM                         Daniel Chen         y
          Intel                       Lorri Menard        y
          NASA                        Tom Clune           y 
          NCAR                        Dan Nagle           y
          NVidia                      Gary Klimowicz      y
          Sandia National Labs        <not present>
          University of Oregon        <not present>


4.4.2 - US position and vote for 1SO/IEC DIS 1539-1 

     Motion to pass all 4 papers as public comments Corbett/Long  UC
       18-106, 
       18-107r1
       18-121r1
       18-137
      (Editor's note: the Word document contains a full table of
       each of the edits in these 4 papers)

      Long/Steidel  Motion to approve DIS with comments.
      Roll call vote:

          Cray, Inc                   Bill Long           y
          Corbett                     Robert Corbett      y
          JPL                         Van Snyder          y
          Kernelyze                   Anton Shterenlikht  y
          Lawrence Berkeley National  Brian Friesen       y
          Lionel                      Steve Lionel        y
          IBM                         Daniel Chen         y
          Intel                       Lorri Menard        y
          NASA                        Tom Clune           y 
          NCAR                        Dan Nagle           y
          NVidia                      Gary Klimowicz      y
          Sandia National Labs        <not present>
          University of Oregon        <not present>

     Motion by Snyder/Long to adjourn US Tag; UC  4:27

4.5 Subgroup reports (4:30 pm)

     /JoR 
       For review and discussion tomorrow:
       18-139, 18-140, 18-143, 18-152

     /DATA
       For review and discussion tomorrow:
       18-141, 18-142, 18-144, 18-149, 18-150, 18-151, 18-153 

     /HPC 
       For review and discussion tomorrow:
       18-145, 18-146, 18-147, 18-148, 18-150 

Recess until tomorrow AM at 4:43PM.

5. Friday, February 16, 2018  8:00 am
--------------------------------------
5.1 F2015 Plenary (13-010)                       Subgroup Heads
   Two more members have left:  Anton Shterenlikht, Van Snyder

      /JoR
      18-139 "Degree trigonometric functions"
          Discussion: Remove hyperbolic, some massaging, 
          but agree with the thrust
            SV: 9 - 0 - 1
      18-140 "Pointers should be disassociated by default"
            SV: 6 - 3 - 1
      18-143 "Add reductions to DO CONCURRENT"
            SV: 5 - 0 - 5

      18-152 "short circuiting logical operators"
          Discussed precedence; group decision to keep it as lowest
            SV: 8 - 0 - 2

      /DATA
      18-141  "Specification variables"  
         idea is good, will be needed for templates
          We should work on this as part of generics, where the 
         feature would be useful but not necessarily in this format.
            SV: 0 - 7 - 3 


      18-142 "Data recommendations on Containers"
          Note; the recommendation is to NOT do containers
            SV: 10 -0 - 0
          "Containers" as a feature will not be brought forward

      18-144 "POINTER dummy arguments, INTENT, and target modification"
          Discussion; typo in paper "target" should be "pointer"
          in P2.  Use a term other than INTENT  
            SV: 7 - 0 - 3

      18-149  "Protection"
             (protected components was separated into 18-146;
              argument pointer targets is 18-144)
              This discusses PROTECTED types only.
            SV: 0 - 6 - 4

      18-151 "VIRTUOUS or Super-pure attribute for functions"
         Discussion: No contact with data defined outside the function
         "four walls".  Module version cannot access module variables.
         Intention is that routine can be run on a co-processor without
         access to host memory.  Compiler/code-gen should be able to
         detect this even without attribute
            SV: 5 - 0 - 5

      18-153  "Views-lite (an example of how views could do real/complex)"
            SV: 0 - 4 - 6

      18-114r1 "Enumeration types"
         Discussion: Some value but expensive in compiler because
         type system affected. No operators or semantics.  If limited to
         a bind(c) feature, would lessen its value
            SV: 6 - 0 - 4

       There are four line-items from 18-122r1 that were not addressed.
        Constructors - Tom would like to consider use cases, 
           perhaps submit a paper later.
        Panoramic views - To pursue it, write the paper for next meeting
        Declarations in implicit <block-construct> - No paper now; maybe
           later
        Units - WG5 has turned it down, not worth submitting another paper

      /HPC
      18-145 "CFI function to return error texts"
            SV: 9 - 0 - 1

      18-146  "Protected components:
            SV: 7 - 0 - 3

      18-147  "Intrinsics to convert C string and Fortran string"
            SV: 7 - 0 - 3

      18-148 "Logical kinds, another real kind"
            SV: 10 - 0 - 0

      18-150 "Intent to specify no intent"
            SV: 7 - 0 - 3

      At the end of the meeting, we decided that Steve would gather
      the results of the various straw votes taken, and will submit
      a summary report.

      The items the committee are confident should be brought
      forward are generic programming/templates, and exception
      handling.

      One should note that a simple recommendation from this committee
      does not guarantee that a feature will be accepted by WG5.
      
5.2 Closing business

5.3 Review of action items (if any)
      Steve has paper to write, others have papers to write
5.4 Future meetings                               D. Nagle
      Signed contracts for 2019, GSA rate, at this hotel
        June 11-15, 2018
        Oct 15-19, 2018     Nagle
        Feb 11-15, 2019     
        Aug 5-9, 2019
        Oct 14-18, 2019

5.5 Treasurer's report                            J. Steidel

12 Feb 2018 Opening balance                   $  2313.20 
12 Feb 2018 Meeting fees                          650.00 
                                                 -------
            Subtotal                          $  2963.20
16 Feb 2018 Fairfield Inn                        -280.84
                                                 -------
16 Feb 2018 Closing balance                    $ 2682.36

Motion to not collect meeting fee at June meeting
      Bob/Tom  UC

5.6 Closing membership report                     L. Menard

         13 member organizations, 12 represented here.
         Total Membership at end of Meeting 215      : 13

5.7 Comments from members

Adjournment   10:30
